
SUMMARY:
id:10
date:2/20/18
docket:137, Orig
name:Montana v Wyoming
summary: Judgment is awarded against Wyoming and in favor of Montana for violations of the Yellowstone River Compact, and decree is entered.
revised:2/20/18
J.:D
Pt.:583/2
url:https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/17pdf/137orig_new_2cp3.pdf

VERDICT:
Cite as: 583 U. S. ____ (2018) 1
Decree 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
STATE OF MONTANA v. STATE OF WYOMING AND 
STATE OF NORTH DAKOTA 
ON BILL OF COMPLAINT 
No. 137, Orig. Decided February 20, 2018The Report of the Special Master is received and or-
dered filed. The proposed judgment and decree are en-
tered.  JUSTICE KAGAN took no part in the consideration or 
decision of this case. 
JUDGMENTJudgment is awarded against the State of Wyoming and 
in favor of the State of Montana for violations of the Yel-
lowstone River Compact resulting from Wyoming’s reduc-
tion of the volume of water available in the Tongue River 
at the Stateline between Wyoming and Montana by 1300 
acre feet in 2004 and 56 acre feet in 2006.  Judgment is 
awarded in the amount of $20,340, together with pre-
judgment and post-judgment interest of seven percent 
(7%) per annum from the year of each violation until paid. 
Costs are awarded to Montana in the amount of 
$67,270.87.Wyoming shall pay these damages, interest, and costs in 
full not later than 90 days from the date of entry of this 
Judgment. Wyoming shall make its payment into an 
account specified by Montana to be used for improvements 
to the Tongue River Reservoir or related facilities in Mon-
tana.  Montana may distribute these funds to a state 
agency or program, a political subdivision of the State, a 
nonprofit corporation, association, and/or a charitable 
organization at the sole discretion of the Montana Attor-
ney General in accordance with the laws of the State of 
Montana, with the express condition that the funds be 
used for improvements to the Tongue River Reservoir or 
related facilities in Montana. 
Judgment 
Per Curiam 
Decree 
2 MONTANA v. WYOMING 
Except as herein provided, all claims in Montana’s Bill 
of Complaint are denied and dismissed with prejudice. 
DECREE 
A. General Provisions 
1. Article V(A) of the Yellowstone River Compact (Com-
pact) protects pre-1950 appropriative rights to the benefi-
cial uses of water of the Yellowstone River System in 
Montana from diversions and withdrawals of surface 
water and groundwater in Wyoming, whether for direct
use or storage, that are not made pursuant to appropriat-
ive rights in Wyoming existing as of January 1, 1950.
2. Article V of the Compact, including the protections of 
Article V(A), applies to all surface waters tributary to the 
Tongue and Powder Rivers (with the exception of the 
explicit exclusions set out in Article V(E) of the Compact).
3. Article V(A) of the Compact does not guarantee Mon-
tana a fixed quantity or flow of water, nor does it limit 
Wyoming to the net volume of water actually consumed in 
Wyoming prior to January 1, 1950.
4. Article V(A) of the Compact protects pre-1950 appro-
priative rights only to the extent they are for “beneficial 
uses,” as defined in Article II(H) of the Compact, and are 
otherwise consistent with the doctrine of appropriation. In
particular, pre-1950 rights are not protected to the extent
they are wasteful under the doctrine of appropriation. 
5. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Decree 
or the Compact, the laws of Montana and Wyoming (in-
cluding rules for reservoir accounting) govern the admin-
istration and management of each State’s respective water 
rights in the implementation of Article V(A) of the Compact. 
B. Calls
 1. To protect pre-1950 appropriative rights under Ar-
ticle V(A) of the Compact, Montana must place a call. 
Wyoming is not liable for flow or storage impacts that take
 
Decree
3 Cite as: 583 U. S. ____ (2018) 
place when a call is not in effect. 
2. Subject to paragraph B(3), Montana may place a call 
on the Tongue River whenever (a) a pre-1950 direct flow 
right in Montana is not receiving the water to which it is
entitled, or (b) Montana reasonably believes, based on
substantial evidence, that the Tongue River Reservoir
might not fill before the end of the water year. 
3. Montana cannot place a call under Article V(A) when
it can remedy shortages of pre-1950 appropriators in
Montana through purely intrastate means that do not 
prejudice Montana’s other rights under the Compact.
4. A call need not take any particular form, use any 
specific language, or be delivered by or to any particular 
official, but should be sufficient to place Wyoming on clear 
notice that Montana needs additional water to satisfy its
pre-1950 appropriative rights.
5. A call is effective upon receipt by Wyoming and con-
tinues in effect until Montana notifies Wyoming that 
Montana is lifting the call.
6. Montana shall promptly notify Wyoming that it is 
lifting a call when (a) pre-1950 direct flow rights in Mon-
tana are receiving the water to which they are entitled,
and (b) Montana reasonably believes, based on substantial 
evidence, that the Tongue River Reservoir will fill before
the end of the water year. Montana may place a new call
at a later date if the conditions of paragraph B(2) are
again met.
7. Upon receiving a call, Wyoming shall promptly initi-
ate action to ensure, to the degree physically possible, that 
only pre-1950 appropriators in Wyoming are diverting or 
storing surface water and only to the degree permitted by 
their appropriative rights and this Decree.  Wyoming also
shall promptly initiate any action needed to ensure, to the
degree physically possible, that any groundwater
withdrawals under post-January 1, 1950 appropriative 
rights are not interfering with the continued enjoyment of 
Per Curiam 
  
4 MONTANA v. WYOMING 
Decree
pre-1950 surface rights in Montana.  Wyoming shall be
liable for diversions, storage, or withdrawals in violation 
of Article V(A) of the Compact even if it was not physically 
possible for Wyoming to prevent the diversions, storage, or 
withdrawals during a call (including depletions caused by 
groundwater withdrawals occurring before the call).
Where it is initially not physically possible to prevent the
storage of water in violation of Article V(A), Wyoming 
shall deliver such water to Montana as soon as it is physi-
cally possible to do so after a request from Montana. 
C. Pre-1950 Appropriative Rights 
1. The Compact assigns the same seniority level to all
pre-1950 water users in Montana and Wyoming. Except
as otherwise provided in this Decree, the exercise of pre-
1950 appropriative rights in Wyoming does not violate the
Compact rights of pre-1950 appropriative rights in Montana.
2. Article V(A) does not prohibit Montana or Wyoming
from allowing a pre-1950 appropriator to conserve water 
through the adoption of improved irrigation techniques 
and then use that water to irrigate the lands to which the
specific pre-1950 appropriative right attaches, even when
the increased consumption interferes with pre-1950 uses
in Montana.  Article V(A) protects pre-1950 appropriators
in Montana from the use of such conserved water in Wyo-
ming on new lands or for new purposes. Such uses fall 
within Article V(B) of the Compact and cannot interfere
with pre-1950 appropriative rights in Montana. 
3. Pre-1950 appropriators in Montana and Wyoming
may change their place of use, type of use, and point of
diversion pursuant to applicable state law, so long as any 
such changes do not injure appropriators in the other 
States as evaluated at the time of the change. 
D. Wyoming Storage Reservoirs 
1. Post-January 1, 1950 appropriators in Wyoming may
Decree
 
5 Cite as: 583 U. S. ____ (2018) 
not store water when Montana has issued a call, except as 
provided in paragraph B(7) of this Decree.  Post-January
1, 1950 appropriators in Wyoming may store water during
periods when a call is not in effect.
2. Water stored under post-January 1, 1950 appropriat-
ive rights in Wyoming when a call is not in effect has been 
legally stored under the Compact and can be subsequently 
used at any time, including when pre-1950 appropriative
rights in Montana are unsatisfied.  The Compact does not 
require Wyoming to release such water to Montana in
response to a call. 
E. Tongue River Reservoir 
1. Article V(A) protects Montana’s right to store each
water year (October 1 to September 30) up to, but not 
more than, 72,500 acre feet of water in the Tongue River 
Reservoir, less carryover storage in excess of 6,571 acre
feet. If the Tongue River Reservoir begins the water year
on October 1 with over 6,571 acre feet of carryover water, 
Article V(A) protects Montana’s right to fill the Tongue 
River Reservoir to its current capacity of 79,071 acre feet. 
2. Montana must avoid wasting water in its operation of 
the Tongue River Reservoir by not permitting outflows 
during winter months that are not dictated by good engi-
neering practices. Any wasteful outflows reduce the 
amount of water storage protected under Article V(A) for 
that water year by an equal volume. 
3. The reasonable range for winter outflows from the
Tongue River Reservoir is 75 to 175 cubic feet per second. 
The appropriate outflow at any particular point of time
varies within this range and depends on the specific condi-
tions, including, but not limited to, the needs of down-
stream appropriative water rights and risks such as ice
jams and flooding.  Montana enjoys significant discretion
in setting the appropriate outflow within this range and in 
other reservoir operations. 
Per Curiam
6 MONTANA v. WYOMING 
Decree
F. General Reservoir Rules 
1. Article V(A) of the Compact does not protect water
stored exclusively for non-depletive purposes, such as 
hydroelectric generation and fish protection. 
2. Montana and Wyoming must operate and regulate
reservoirs on the Tongue River and its tributaries in a
fashion that is generally consistent with the appropriation
laws and rules that govern similar reservoirs elsewhere in 
each respective State.
G. Exchange of Information 
1. Within 30 days of the entry of this Decree, Montana 
and Wyoming each shall provide the other State with a
list of its current surface water rights in the Tongue River
basin, including information on which rights are pre-1950 
and which are post-January 1, 1950.  Montana and Wyo-
ming thereafter will annually inform the other State of 
any changes in these water rights, unless such infor-
mation is publicly and readily available to the other State.
2. If requested, Montana and Wyoming also shall pro-
vide the other State annually with any data available in 
the ordinary course of water administration that shows 
the location and amount of groundwater pumping in the
Tongue River and Powder River basins, except where the
groundwater is used exclusively for domestic or stock 
water uses as defined in Article II of the Compact.
3. Montana and Wyoming shall exchange information,
as reasonable and appropriate, relevant to the effective
implementation of Article V(A) of the Compact.  In partic-
ular, Wyoming in response to a call shall notify Montana 
of the actions that it intends to take and has taken in
response to the call, and when requested, provide Mon-
tana with reasonable assurances and documentation of 
these actions. In making a call, Montana in turn will
notify Wyoming of any intrastate actions it has taken to 
remedy shortages of pre-1950 appropriators, and when
 7 Cite as: 583 U. S. ____ (2018) 
Decree
requested, provide Wyoming with reasonable assurances 
and documentation of these actions. 
4. The Yellowstone River Compact Commission remains 
free to modify or supplement the terms of the provisions of 
paragraph G of this Decree pursuant to its authority 
under the Compact.
H. Rights of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe 
Nothing in this Decree addresses or determines the 
water rights of any Indian Tribe or Indian reservation or 
the status of such rights under the Yellowstone River 
Compact.
I. Retention of Jurisdiction 
Any of the parties may apply at the foot of this Decree
for its amendment or for further relief.  The Court retains
jurisdiction to entertain such further proceedings, enter
such orders, and issue such writs as it may from time to 
time deem necessary or desirable to give proper force and
effect to this Decree.
              