
SUMMARY:
id:48
date:6/11/18
docket:16-980
name:Husted v. A. Philip Randolph Institute
summary: The process that Ohio uses to remove voters on change-of-residence grounds does not violate the National Voter Registration Act.
revised: 
J.:A
Pt.:584/2
url:https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/17pdf/16-980_f2q3.pdf

VERDICT:
(Slip Opinion) OCTOBER TERM, 2017 1
Syllabus 
NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is 
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued. 
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been 
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. 
See United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co., 200 U. S. 321, 337. 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
Syllabus 
HUSTED, OHIO SECRETARY OF STATE v. A. PHILIP 
RANDOLPH INSTITUTE ET AL. 
CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR 
THE SIXTH CIRCUIT 
No. 16–980. Argued January 10, 2018—Decided June 11, 2018 
The National Voter Registration Act (NVRA) addresses the removal of 
ineligible voters from state voting rolls, 52 U. S. C. §20501(b), includ-
ing those who are ineligible “by reason of” a change in residence, 
§20507(a)(4).  The Act prescribes requirements that a State must 
meet in order to remove a name on change-of-residence grounds, 
§§20507(b), (c), (d).  The most relevant of these are found in subsec-
tion (d), which provides that a State may not remove a name on 
change-of-residence grounds unless the registrant either (A) confirms 
in writing that he or she has moved or (B) fails to return a pread-
dressed, postage prepaid “return card” containing statutorily pre-
scribed content and then fails to vote in any election during the peri-
od covering the next two general federal elections. In addition to these specific change-of-residence requirements, the 
NVRA also contains a general “Failure-to-Vote Clause,” §20507(b)(2), 
consisting of two parts.  It first provides that a state removal pro-
gram “shall not result in the removal of the name of any per-
son . . . by reason of the person’s failure to vote.”  Second, as added by 
the Help America Vote Act of 2002 (HAVA), it specifies that “nothing 
in [this prohibition] may be construed to prohibit a State from using 
the procedures” described above—sending a return card and remov-
ing registrants who fail to return the card and fail to vote for the req-
uisite time.  Since one of the requirements for removal under subsec-
tion (d) is the failure to vote, the explanation added by HAVA makes 
clear that the Failure-to-Vote Clause’s prohibition on removal “by 
reason of the person’s failure to vote” does not categorically preclude 
using nonvoting as part of a test for removal.  Another provision 
makes this point even more clearly by providing that “no registrant 
2 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
Syllabus 
may be removed solely by reason of a failure to vote.”  §21083(a)(4)(A) 
(emphasis added). Respondents contend that Ohio’s process for removing voters on 
change-of-residence grounds violates this federal law.  The Ohio pro-
cess at issue relies on the failure to vote for two years as a rough way 
of identifying voters who may have moved.  It sends these nonvoters 
a preaddressed, postage prepaid return card, asking them to verify 
that they still reside at the same address.  Voters who do not return 
the card and fail to vote in any election for four more years are pre-
sumed to have moved and are removed from the rolls. 
Held: The process that Ohio uses to remove voters on change-of-
residence grounds does not violate the Failure-to-Vote Clause or any 
other part of the NVRA.  Pp. 8–21.(a) Ohio’s law does not violate the Failure-to-Vote Clause.  Pp. 8–
16. (1) Ohio’s removal process follows subsection (d) to the letter: It 
does not remove a registrant on change-of-residence grounds unless 
the registrant is sent and fails to mail back a return card and then 
fails to vote for an additional four years.  See §20507(d)(1)(B).  Pp. 8–
9. (2) Nonetheless, respondents argue that Ohio’s process violates 
subsection (b)’s Failure-to-Vote Clause by using a person’s failure to 
vote twice over: once as the trigger for sending return cards and 
again as one of the two requirements for removal.  But Congress 
could not have meant for the Failure-to-Vote Clause to cannibalize 
subsection (d) in that way.  Instead, the Failure-to-Vote Clause, both 
as originally enacted in the NVRA and as amended by HAVA, simply 
forbids the use of nonvoting as the sole criterion for removing a regis-
trant, and Ohio does not use it that way.  The phrase “by reason of” 
in the Failure-to-Vote Clause denotes some form of causation, see 
Gross v. FBL Financial Services, Inc., 557 U. S. 167, 176, and in con-
text sole causation is the only type of causation that harmonizes the 
Failure-to-Vote Clause and subsection (d).  Any other reading would 
mean that a State that follows subsection (d) nevertheless can violate 
the Failure-to-Vote Clause.  When Congress enacted HAVA, it made 
this point explicit by adding to the Failure-to-Vote Clause an expla-
nation of how the clause is to be read, i.e., in a way that does not con-
tradict subsection (d).  Pp. 9–12. (3) Respondents’ and the dissent’s alternative reading is incon-
sistent with both the text of the Failure-to-Vote Clause and the clari-
fication of its meaning in §21083(a)(4).  Among other things, their 
reading would make HAVA’s new language worse than redundant, 
since no sensible person would read the Failure-to-Vote Clause as 
prohibiting what subsections (c) and (d) expressly allow.  Nor doesCite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 3
Syllabus 
the Court’s interpretation render the Failure-to-Vote Clause super-
fluous; the clause retains meaning because it prohibits States from 
using nonvoting both as the ground for removal and as the sole evi-
dence for another ground for removal (e.g., as the sole evidence that 
someone has died).  Pp. 12–15. (4) Respondents’ additional argument—that so many registered 
voters discard return cards upon receipt that the failure to send cards 
back is worthless as evidence that an addressee has moved—is based 
on a dubious empirical conclusion that conflicts with the congression-
al judgment found in subsection (d).  Congress clearly did not think 
that the failure to send back a return card was of no evidentiary val-
ue, having made that conduct one of the two requirements for remov-
al under subsection (d).  Pp. 15–16.(b) Nor has Ohio violated other NVRA provisions.  Pp. 16–21. (1) Ohio removes the registrants at issue on a permissible 
ground: change of residence.  The failure to return a notice and the 
failure to vote simply serve as evidence that a registrant has moved, 
not as the ground itself for removal.  Pp. 16–17. (2) The NVRA contains no “reliable indicator” prerequisite to 
sending notices, requiring States to have good information that 
someone has moved before sending them a return card.  So long as 
the trigger for sending such notices is “uniform, nondiscriminatory, 
and in compliance with the Voting Rights Act,” §20507(b)(1), States 
may use whatever trigger they think best, including the failure to 
vote.  Pp. 17–19. (3)  Ohio has not violated the NVRA’s “reasonable effort” provi-
sion, §20507(a)(4).  Even assuming that this provision authorizes fed-
eral courts to go beyond the restrictions set out in subsections (b), (c), 
and (d) and strike down a state law that does not meet some stand-
ard of “reasonableness,” Ohio’s process cannot be unreasonable be-
cause it uses the change-of-residence evidence that Congress said it 
could: the failure to send back a notice coupled with the failure to 
vote for the requisite period.  Ohio’s process is accordingly lawful.  
Pp. 19–21. 
838 F. 3d 699, reversed.ALITO, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which ROBERTS, C. J., 
and KENNEDY, THOMAS, and GORSUCH, JJ., joined.  THOMAS, J., filed a 
concurring opinion.  BREYER, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which 
GINSBURG, SOTOMAYOR, and KAGAN, JJ., joined.  SOTOMAYOR, J., filed a 
dissenting opinion.Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 1
Opinion of the Court 
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the 
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to 
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash-
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order 
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press. 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
_________________ 
No. 16–980 
_________________ 
JON HUSTED, OHIO SECRETARY OF STATE, 
PETITIONER v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH 
INSTITUTE, ET AL. 
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 
APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT 
[June 11, 2018]JUSTICE ALITO delivered the opinion of the Court.It has been estimated that 24 million voter registrations 
in the United States—about one in eight—are either 
invalid or significantly inaccurate.  Pew Center on the 
States, Election Initiatives Issue Brief (Feb. 2012).  And 
about 2.75 million people are said to be registered to vote 
in more than one State.  Ibid.At issue in today’s case is an Ohio law that aims to keep 
the State’s voting lists up to date by removing the names 
of those who have moved out of the district where they are 
registered.  Ohio uses the failure to vote for two years as a 
rough way of identifying voters who may have moved, and 
it then sends a preaddressed, postage prepaid card to 
these individuals asking them to verify that they still 
reside at the same address.  Voters who do not return this 
card and fail to vote in any election for four more years are 
presumed to have moved and are removed from the rolls.  
We are asked to decide whether this program complies 
with federal law. 
2 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
Opinion of the Court 
I 
ALike other States, Ohio requires voters to reside in the 
district in which they vote.  Ohio Rev. Code Ann. 
§3503.01(A) (West Supp. 2017); see National Conference of 
State Legislatures, Voting by Nonresidents and Non- 
citizens (Feb. 27, 2015).  When voters move out of that 
district, they become ineligible to vote there.  See 
§3503.01(A).  And since more than 10% of Americans move 
every year,1 deleting the names of those who have moved 
away is no small undertaking.For many years, Congress left it up to the States to 
maintain accurate lists of those eligible to vote in federal 
elections, but in 1993, with the enactment of the National 
Voter Registration Act (NVRA), Congress intervened.  The 
NVRA “erect[s] a complex superstructure of federal regu-
lation atop state voter-registration systems.”  Arizona v. 
Inter Tribal Council of Ariz., Inc., 570 U. S. 1, 5 (2013).  
The Act has two main objectives: increasing voter registra-
tion and removing ineligible persons from the States’ voter 
registration rolls.  See §2, 107 Stat. 77, 52 U. S. C. 
§20501(b).To achieve the latter goal, the NVRA requires States to 
“conduct a general program that makes a reasonable effort 
to remove the names” of voters who are ineligible “by 
reason of ” death or change in residence.  §20507(a)(4).  
—————— 
1 United States Census Bureau, CB16–189, Americans Moving at 
Historically Low Rates (Nov. 16, 2016), available at https://www. 
census.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2016/cb16-189.html (all Internet 
materials as last visited June 8, 2018).  States must update the ad-
dresses of even those voters who move within their county of residence, 
for (among other reasons) counties may contain multiple voting dis-
tricts.  Cf. post, at 12 (BREYER, J., dissenting).  For example, Cuyahoga 
County contains 11 State House districts.  See House District Map, 
Ohio House Districts 2012–2022, online at http://www.ohiohouse.gov/ 
members/district-map.Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 3
Opinion of the Court 
The Act also prescribes requirements that a State must 
meet in order to remove a name on change-of-residence 
grounds.  §§20507(b), (c), (d).The most important of these requirements is a prior 
notice obligation.  Before the NVRA, some States removed 
registrants without giving any notice.  See J. Harris, Nat. 
Munic. League, Model Voter Registration System 45 (rev. 
4th ed. 1957).  The NVRA changed that by providing in 
§20507(d)(1) that a State may not remove a registrant’s 
name on change-of-residence grounds unless either (A) the  
registrant confirms in writing that he or she has moved or 
(B) the registrant fails to return a preaddressed, postage 
prepaid “return card” containing statutorily prescribed 
content.  This card must explain what a registrant who 
has not moved needs to do in order to stay on the rolls, i.e., 
either return the card or vote during the period covering 
the next two general federal elections.  §20507(d)(2)(A).  
And for the benefit of those who have moved, the card 
must contain “information concerning how the registrant 
can continue to be eligible to vote.”  §20507(d)(2)(B).  If 
the State does not send such a card or otherwise get writ-
ten notice that the person has moved, it may not remove 
the registrant on change-of-residence grounds.  See 
§20507(d)(1).2While the NVRA is clear about the need to send a “re-
turn card” (or obtain written confirmation of a move) 
before pruning a registrant’s name, no provision of federal 
law specifies the circumstances under which a return card 
—————— 
2 The principal dissent attaches a misleading label to this return card, 
calling it a “ ‘last chance’ notice.”  Post, at 6–7, 9–12 (opinion of BREYER, 
J.).  It is actually no such thing.  Sending back the notice does not 
represent a voter’s “last chance” to avoid having his or her name 
stricken from the rolls.  Instead, such a voter has many more chances 
over a period of four years to avoid that result.  All that the voter must 
do is vote in any election during that time.  See 52 U. S. C. 
§20507(d)(1)(B). 
4 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
Opinion of the Court 
may be sent. Accordingly, States take a variety of ap-
proaches.  See Nat. Assn. of Secretaries of State (NASS) 
Report: Maintenance of State Voter Registration Lists 5–6 
(Dec. 2017).  The NVRA itself sets out one option.  A State 
may send these cards to those who have submitted 
“change-of-address information” to the United States 
Postal Service.  §20507(c)(1).  Thirty-six States do at least 
that.  See NASS Report, supra, at 5, and n. v (listing 
States).  Other States send notices to every registered 
voter at specified intervals (say, once a year).  See, e.g., 
Iowa Code §48A.28.3 (2012); S. C. Code Ann. §§7–5–
330(F), 7–5–340(2)–(3) (2017 Cum. Supp.); see also S. Rep. 
No. 103–6, p. 46 (1993).  Still other States, including Ohio, 
take an intermediate approach, see NASS Report, supra, 
at 5–6, such as sending notices to those who have turned 
in their driver’s licenses, e.g., Ind. Code §§3–7–38.2–
2(b)(2), (c)(4) (2004), or sending notices to those who have 
not voted for some period of time, see, e.g., Ga. Code Ann. 
§21–2–234 (Supp. 2017); Ohio Rev. Code Ann. 
§3503.21(B)(2); Okla. Admin. Code §230:15–11–19(a)(3) 
(2016); Pa. Stat. Ann., Tit. 25, §1901(b)(3) (Purdon 2007); 
Wis. Stat. Ann. §6.50(1) (2017 West Cum. Supp.).When a State receives a return card confirming that a 
registrant has left the district, the State must remove the 
voter’s name from the rolls.  §§20507(d)(1)(A), (3).  And if 
the State receives a card stating that the registrant has 
not moved, the registrant’s name must be kept on the list.  
See §20507(d)(2)(A).What if no return card is mailed back?  Congress obvi-
ously anticipated that some voters who received cards 
would fail to return them for any number of reasons, and 
it addressed this contingency in §20507(d), which, for 
convenience, we will simply call “subsection (d).”  Subsec-
tion (d) treats the failure to return a card as some evi-
dence—but by no means conclusive proof—that the voter 
has moved.  Instead, the voter’s name is kept on the listCite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 5
Opinion of the Court 
for a period covering two general elections for federal office 
(usually about four years).  Only if the registrant fails to 
vote during that period and does not otherwise confirm 
that he or she still lives in the district (e.g., by updating 
address information online) may the registrant’s name be 
removed.  §20507(d)(2)(A); see §§20507(d)(1)(B), (3).In addition to these specific change-of-residence re-
quirements, the NVRA also imposes two general limita-
tions that are applicable to state removal programs.  First, 
all such programs must be “uniform, nondiscriminatory, 
and in compliance with the Voting Rights Act of 1965.”  
§20507(b)(1).  Second, the NVRA contains what we will 
call the “Failure-to-Vote Clause.”  See §20507(b)(2).At present, this clause contains two parts.  The first is a 
prohibition that was included in the NVRA when it was 
originally enacted in 1993.  It provides that a state pro-
gram “shall not result in the removal of the name of any 
person . . . by reason of the person’s failure to vote.”  Ibid.  
The second part, added by the Help America Vote Act of 
2002 (HAVA), 116 Stat. 1666, explains the meaning of 
that prohibition.  This explanation says that “nothing in 
[the prohibition] may be construed to prohibit a State from 
using the procedures described in [§§20507](c) and (d) to 
remove an individual from the official list of eligible vot-
ers.”  §20507(b)(2).These referenced subsections, §§20507(c) and (d), are 
the provisions allowing the removal of registrants who 
either submitted change-of-address information to the 
Postal Service (subsection (c)) or did not mail back a re-
turn card and did not vote during a period covering two 
general federal elections (subsection (d)).  And since one of 
the requirements for removal under subsection (d) is the 
failure to vote during this period, the explanation added 
by HAVA in 2002 makes it clear that the statutory phrase 
“by reason of the person’s failure to vote” in the Failure-to-
Vote Clause does not categorically preclude the use of 
6 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
Opinion of the Court 
nonvoting as part of a test for removal.Another provision of HAVA makes this point more 
directly.  After directing that “registrants who have not 
responded to a notice and . . . have not voted in 2 consecu-
tive general elections for Federal office shall be removed,” 
it adds that “no registrant may be removed solely by rea-
son of a failure to vote.”  §21083(a)(4)(A) (emphasis added). 
BSince 1994, Ohio has used two procedures to identify 
and remove voters who have lost their residency 
qualification.First, the State utilizes the Postal Service option set out 
in the NVRA.  The State sends notices to registrants 
whom the Postal Service’s “national change of address 
service” identifies as having moved.  Ohio Rev. Code Ann. 
§3503.21(B)(1).  This procedure is undisputedly lawful.  
See 52 U. S. C. §20507(c)(1).But because according to the Postal Service “[a]s many 
as 40 percent of people who move do not inform the Postal 
Service,”3 Ohio does not rely on this information alone.  In 
its so-called Supplemental Process, Ohio “identif[ies] 
electors whose lack of voter activity indicates they may 
have moved.”  Record 401 (emphasis deleted).  Under this 
process, Ohio sends notices to registrants who have “not 
engage[d] in any voter activity for a period of two consecu-
tive years.”  Id., at 1509.  “Voter activity” includes “casting 
a ballot” in any election—whether general, primary, or 
special and whether federal, state, or local.  See id., at 
1507.  (And Ohio regularly holds elections on both even 
and odd years.)  Moreover, the term “voter activity” is 
—————— 
3 U. S. Postal Service, Office of Inspector Gen., MS–MA–15–006, 
Strategies for Reducing Undeliverable as Addressed Mail 15 (2015); see 
also Brief for Buckeye Institute as Amicus Curiae 10.  Respondents and 
one of their amici dispute this statistic.  See Tr. of Oral Arg. 46; Brief 
for Asian Americans Advancing Justice et al. as Amici Curiae 27–28.Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 7
Opinion of the Court 
broader than simply voting.  It also includes such things 
as “sign[ing] a petition,” “filing a voter registration form, 
and updating a voting address with a variety of [state] 
entities.”  Id., at 295, 357.After sending these notices, Ohio removes registrants 
from the rolls only if they “fai[l] to respond” and “con-
tinu[e] to be inactive for an additional period of four con-
secutive years, including two federal general elections.”  
Id., at 1509; see Ohio Rev. Code Ann. §3503.21(B)(2).  
Federal law specifies that a registration may be canceled if 
the registrant does not vote “in an election during the 
period” covering two general federal elections after notice, 
§20507(d)(1)(B)(ii), but Ohio rounds up to “four consecu-
tive years” of nonvoting after notice, Record 1509.  Thus, a 
person remains on the rolls if he or she votes in any elec-
tion during that period—which in Ohio typically means 
voting in any of the at least four elections after notice.  
Combined with the two years of nonvoting before notice is 
sent, that makes a total of six years of nonvoting before 
removal.  Ibid. 
CA pair of advocacy groups and an Ohio resident (re-
spondents here) think that Ohio’s Supplemental Process 
violates the NVRA and HAVA.  They sued petitioner, 
Ohio’s Secretary of State, seeking to enjoin this process.  
Respondents alleged, first, that Ohio removes voters who 
have not actually moved, thus purging the rolls of eligible 
voters.  They also contended that Ohio violates the 
NVRA’s Failure-to-Vote Clause because the failure to vote 
plays a prominent part in the Ohio removal scheme: Fail-
ure to vote for two years triggers the sending of a return 
card, and if the card is not returned, failure to vote for four 
more years results in removal.The District Court rejected both of these arguments and 
entered judgment for the Secretary.  It held that Ohio’s 
8 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
Opinion of the Court 
Supplemental Process “mirror[s] the procedures estab-
lished by the NVRA” for removing people on change-of-
residence grounds and does not violate the Failure-to-Vote 
Clause because it does not remove anyone “solely for 
[their] failure to vote.”  App. to Pet. for Cert. 43a, 57a, 
69a–70a.A divided panel of the Court of Appeals for the Sixth 
Circuit reversed.  838 F. 3d 699 (2016).  It focused on 
respondents’ second argument, holding that Ohio violates 
the Failure-to-Vote Clause because it sends change-of-
residence notices “based ‘solely’ on a person’s failure to 
vote.”  Id., at 711.  In dissent, Judge Siler explained why 
he saw the case as a simple one: “The State cannot remove 
the registrant’s name from the rolls for a failure to vote 
only, and Ohio does not do [that].”  Id., at 716.We granted certiorari, 581 U. S. ___ (2017), and now 
reverse. 
II 
AAs noted, subsection (d), the provision of the NVRA that 
directly addresses the procedures that a State must follow 
before removing a registrant from the rolls on change-of-
residence grounds, provides that a State may remove a 
registrant who “(i) has failed to respond to a notice” and 
“(ii) has not voted or appeared to vote . . . during the pe- 
riod beginning on the date of the notice and ending on the 
day after the date of the second general election for Fed- 
eral office that occurs after the date of the notice” (about 
four years).  52 U. S. C. §20507(d)(1)(B).  Not only are 
States allowed to remove registrants who satisfy these 
requirements, but federal law makes this removal manda-
tory.  §20507(d)(3); see also §21083(a)(4)(A).Ohio’s Supplemental Process follows subsection (d) to 
the letter.  It is undisputed that Ohio does not remove a 
registrant on change-of-residence grounds unless theCite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 9
Opinion of the Court 
registrant is sent and fails to mail back a return card and 
then fails to vote for an additional four years. 
BRespondents argue (and the Sixth Circuit held) that, 
even if Ohio’s process complies with subsection (d), it 
nevertheless violates the Failure-to-Vote Clause—the 
clause that generally prohibits States from removing 
people from the rolls “by reason of [a] person’s failure to 
vote.”  §20507(b)(2); see also §21083(a)(4)(A).  Respondents 
point out that Ohio’s Supplemental Process uses a person’s 
failure to vote twice: once as the trigger for sending return 
cards and again as one of the requirements for removal.  
Respondents conclude that this use of nonvoting is illegal.We reject this argument because the Failure-to-Vote 
Clause, both as originally enacted in the NVRA and as 
amended by HAVA, simply forbids the use of nonvoting as 
the sole criterion for removing a registrant, and Ohio does 
not use it that way.  Instead, as permitted by subsection 
(d), Ohio removes registrants only if they have failed to 
vote and have failed to respond to a notice.When Congress clarified the meaning of the NVRA’s 
Failure-to-Vote Clause in HAVA, here is what it said: 
“[C]onsistent with the [NVRA], . . . no registrant may be 
removed solely by reason of a failure to vote.”  
§21083(a)(4)(A) (emphasis added).  The meaning of these 
words is straightforward.  “Solely” means “alone.”  Web-
ster’s Third New International Dictionary 2168 (2002); 
American Heritage Dictionary 1654 (4th ed. 2000).  And 
“by reason of ” is a “quite formal” way of saying “[b]ecause 
of.”  C. Ammer, American Heritage Dictionary of Idioms 
67 (2d ed. 2013).  Thus, a State violates the Failure-to-
Vote Clause only if it removes registrants for no reason 
other than their failure to vote.This explanation of the meaning of the Failure-to-Vote 
Clause merely makes explicit what was implicit in the 
10 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
Opinion of the Court 
clause as originally enacted.  At that time, the clause 
simply said that a state program “shall not result in the 
removal of the name of any person from the [rolls for 
federal elections] by reason of the person’s failure to vote.”  
107 Stat. 83.  But that prohibition had to be read together 
with subsection (d), which authorized removal if a regis-
trant did not send back a return card and also failed to 
vote during a period covering two successive general elec-
tions for federal office.  If possible, “[w]e must interpret 
the statute to give effect to both provisions,” Ricci v. 
DeStefano, 557 U. S. 557, 580 (2009), and here, that is 
quite easy.The phrase “by reason of ” denotes some form of causa-
tion.  See Gross v. FBL Financial Services, Inc., 557 U. S. 
167, 176 (2009).  Thus, the Failure-to-Vote Clause applies 
when nonvoting, in some sense, causes a registrant’s name 
to be removed, but the law recognizes several types of 
causation.  When a statutory provision includes an unde-
fined causation requirement, we look to context to decide 
whether the statute demands only but-for cause as op-
posed to proximate cause or sole cause.  See Holmes v. 
Securities Investor Protection Corporation, 503 U. S. 258, 
265–268 (1992).  Cf. CSX Transp., Inc. v. McBride, 564 
U. S. 685, 692–693 (2011).Which form of causation is required by the Failure-to-
Vote Clause?  We can readily rule out but-for causation.  If 
“by reason of ” in the Failure-to-Vote Clause meant but-for 
causation, a State would violate the clause if the failure to 
vote played a necessary part in the removal of a name 
from the list.  Burrage v. United States, 571 U. S. 204, 211 
(2014).  But the removal process expressly authorized by 
subsection (d) allows a State to remove a registrant if the 
registrant, in addition to failing to send back a return 
card, fails to vote during a period covering two general 
federal elections.  So if the Failure-to-Vote Clause were 
read in this way, it would cannibalize subsection (d).Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 11
Opinion of the CourtInterpreting the Failure-to-Vote Clause as incorporating 
a proximate cause requirement would lead to a similar 
problem.  Proximate cause is an elusive concept, see 
McBride, supra, at 692–693, but no matter how the term 
is understood, it is hard to escape the conclusion that the 
failure to vote is a proximate cause of removal under 
subsection (d).  If a registrant, having failed to send back a 
return card, also fails to vote during the period covering 
the next two general federal elections, removal is the 
direct, foreseeable, and closely connected consequence.  
See Paroline v. United States, 572 U. S. 434, 444–445 
(2014); Bridge v. Phoenix Bond & Indemnity Co., 553 U. S. 
639, 654 (2008).By process of elimination, we are left with sole causa-
tion.  This reading harmonizes the Failure-to-Vote Clause 
and subsection (d) because the latter provision does not 
authorize removal solely by reason of a person’s failure to 
vote.  Instead, subsection (d) authorizes removal only if a 
registrant also fails to mail back a return card.For these reasons, we conclude that the Failure-to-Vote 
Clause, as originally enacted, referred to sole causation.  
And when Congress enacted HAVA, it made this point 
explicit.  It added to the Failure-to-Vote Clause itself an 
explanation of how it is to be read, i.e., in a way that does 
not contradict subsection (d).  And in language that cannot 
be misunderstood, it reiterated what the clause means: 
“[R]egistrants who have not responded to a notice and who 
have not voted in 2 consecutive general elections for Fed-
eral office shall be removed from the official list of eligible 
voters, except that no registrant may be removed solely by 
reason of a failure to vote.”  §21083(a)(4)(A) (emphasis 
added).  In this way, HAVA dispelled any doubt that a 
state removal program may use the failure to vote as a 
factor (but not the sole factor) in removing names from the 
list of registered voters.That is exactly what Ohio’s Supplemental Process does.  
12 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
Opinion of the Court 
It does not strike any registrant solely by reason of the 
failure to vote.  Instead, as expressly permitted by federal 
law, it removes registrants only when they have failed to 
vote and have failed to respond to a change-of-residence 
notice. 
CRespondents and the dissent advance an alternative 
interpretation of the Failure-to-Vote Clause, but that 
reading is inconsistent with both the text of the clause and 
the clarification of its meaning in §21083(a)(4)(A).  Re-
spondents argue that the clause allows States to consider 
nonvoting only to the extent that subsection (d) requires—
that is, only after a registrant has failed to mail back a 
notice.  Any other use of the failure to vote, including as 
the trigger for mailing a notice, they claim, is proscribed.  
In essence, respondents read the language added to the 
clause by HAVA—“except that nothing in this paragraph 
may be construed to prohibit a State from using the proce-
dures described in subsections (c) and (d)”—as an excep-
tion to the general rule forbidding the use of nonvoting.  
See Brief for Respondents 37.  And the Sixth Circuit 
seemed to find this point dispositive, reasoning that “ ‘ex-
ceptions in statutes must be strictly construed.’ ”  838 
F. 3d, at 708 (quoting Detroit Edison Co. v. SEC, 119 F. 2d 
730, 739 (CA6 1941)).We reject this argument for three reasons.  First, it 
distorts what the new language added by HAVA actually 
says.  The new language does not create an exception to a 
general rule against the use of nonvoting.  It does not say 
that the failure to vote may not be used “except that this 
paragraph does not prohibit a State from using the proce-
dures described in subsections (c) and (d).”  Instead, it 
says that “nothing in this paragraph may be construed” to 
have that effect.  §20507(b)(2) (emphasis added).  Thus, it 
sets out not an exception, but a rule of interpretation.  ItCite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 13
Opinion of the Court 
does not narrow the language that precedes it; it clarifies 
what that language means.  That is precisely what Con-
gress said when it enacted HAVA: It added the “may not 
be construed” provision to “[c]larif[y],” not to alter, the 
prohibition’s scope.  §903, 116 Stat. 1728.Second, under respondents’ reading, HAVA’s new lan-
guage is worse than superfluous.  Even without the added 
language, no sensible person would read the Failure-to-
Vote Clause as prohibiting what subsections (c) and (d) 
expressly allow.  Yet according to respondents, that is all 
that the new language accomplishes.  So at a minimum, it 
would be redundant.But the implications of this reading are actually worse 
than that.  There is no reason to create an exception to a 
prohibition unless the prohibition would otherwise forbid 
what the exception allows.  So if the new language were 
an exception, it would seem to follow that prior to HAVA, 
the Failure-to-Vote Clause did outlaw what subsections (c) 
and (d) specifically authorize.  And that, of course, would 
be nonsensical.Third, respondents’ reading of the language that HAVA 
added to the Failure-to-Vote Clause makes it hard to 
understand why Congress prescribed in another section of 
the same Act, i.e., §21083(a)(4)(A), that “no registrant may 
be removed solely by reason of a failure to vote.”  As inter-
preted by respondents, the amended Failure-to-Vote 
Clause prohibits any use of nonvoting with just two nar-
row exceptions—the uses allowed by subsections (c) and 
(d).  So, according to respondents, the amended Failure-to-
Vote Clause prohibits much more than §21083(a)(4)(A).  
That provision, in addition to allowing the use of nonvot-
ing in accordance with subsections (c) and (d), also permits 
the use of nonvoting in any other way that does not treat 
nonvoting as the sole basis for removal.There is no plausible reason why Congress would enact 
the provision that respondents envision.  As interpreted by 
14 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
Opinion of the Court 
respondents, HAVA would be like a law that contains one 
provision making it illegal to drive with a blood alcohol 
level of 0.08 or higher and another provision making it 
illegal to drive with a blood alcohol level of 0.10 or higher.  
The second provision would not only be redundant; it 
would be confusing and downright silly.Our reading, on the other hand, gives the new language 
added to the Failure-to-Vote Clause “real and substantial 
effect.”  Husky Int’l Electronics, Inc. v. Ritz, 578 U. S. ___, 
___ (2016) (slip op., at 4) (internal quotation marks omit-
ted).  It clarifies the meaning of the prohibition against 
removal by reason of nonvoting, a matter that troubled 
some States prior to HAVA’s enactment.  See, e.g., FEC 
Report on the NVRA to the 106th Congress 19 (1999).Respondents and the dissent separately claim that the 
Failure-to-Vote Clause must be read to bar the use of 
nonvoting as a trigger for sending return cards because 
otherwise it would be “superfluous.”  Post, at 17 (opinion of 
BREYER, J.); see Brief for Respondents 29.  After all, sub-
section (d) already prohibits States from removing regis-
trants because of a failure to vote alone.  See §20507(d)(1).  
To have meaning independent of subsection (d), respond-
ents reason, the Failure-to-Vote Clause must prohibit 
other uses of the failure to vote, including its use as a 
trigger for sending out notices.This argument is flawed because the Failure-to-Vote 
Clause has plenty of work to do under our reading.  Most 
important, it prohibits the once-common state practice of 
removing registered voters simply because they failed to 
vote for some period of time.  Not too long ago, 
“[c]ancellation for failure to vote [was] the principal means 
used . . . to purge the [voter] lists.”  Harris, Model Voter 
Registration System, at 44.  States did not use a person’s 
failure to vote as evidence that the person had died or 
moved but as an independent ground for removal.  SeeCite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 15
Opinion of the Court 
ibid.4  Ohio was one such State.  Its Constitution provided 
that “[a]ny elector who fails to vote in at least one election 
during any period of four consecutive years shall cease to 
be an elector unless he again registers to vote.”  Art. V, §1 
(1977).In addition, our reading prohibits States from using the 
failure to vote as the sole cause for removal on any ground, 
not just because of a change of residence.  Recall that 
subsection (d)’s removal process applies only to change-of-
residence removals but that the Failure-to-Vote Clause 
applies to all removals.  Without the Failure-to-Vote 
Clause, therefore, States could use the failure to vote as 
conclusive evidence of ineligibility for some reason other 
than change of residence, such as death, mental incapac- 
ity, or a criminal conviction resulting in prolonged impris-
onment. 
DRespondents put forth one additional argument regard-
ing the Failure-to-Vote Clause.  In essence, it boils down 
to this.  So many properly registered voters simply discard 
return cards upon receipt that the failure to send them 
back is worthless as evidence that the addressee has 
moved.  As respondents’ counsel put it at argument, “a 
notice that doesn’t get returned” tells the State “absolutely 
nothing about whether the person has moved.”  Tr. of Oral 
Arg. 41, 58.  According to respondents, when Ohio removes 
registrants for failing to respond to a notice and failing to 
vote, it functionally “removes people solely for non-voting” 
unless the State has additional “reliable evidence” that a 
registrant has moved.  Id., at 49, 71.This argument is based on a dubious empirical conclu-
—————— 
4 See, e.g., Haw. Rev. Stat. §11–17(a) (1993); Idaho Code Ann. §34–
435 (1981); Minn. Stat. §201.171 (1992); Mont. Code Ann. §13–2–401(1) 
(1993); N. J. Stat. Ann. §19:31–5 (West Supp. 1989); Okla. Stat., Tit. 26, 
§4–120.2 (1991); Utah Code §20–2–24(1)(b) (1991). 
16 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
Opinion of the Court 
sion that the NVRA and HAVA do not allow us to indulge.  
Congress clearly did not think that the failure to send 
back a return card was of no evidentiary value because 
Congress made that conduct one of the two requirements 
for removal under subsection (d).Requiring additional evidence not only second-guesses 
the congressional judgment embodied in subsection (d)’s 
removal process, but it also second-guesses the judgment 
of the Ohio Legislature as expressed in the State’s Sup-
plemental Process.  The Constitution gives States the 
authority to set the qualifications for voting in congres-
sional elections, Art. I, §2, cl. 1; Amdt. 17, as well as the 
authority to set the “Times, Places and Manner” to con-
duct such elections in the absence of contrary congressional 
direction, Art. I, §4, cl. 1.  We have no authority to dismiss 
the considered judgment of Congress and the Ohio Legis-
lature regarding the probative value of a registrant’s 
failure to send back a return card.  See Inter Tribal, 570 
U. S., at 16–19; see also id., at 36–37 (THOMAS, J., dissent-
ing); id., at 42–43, 46 (ALITO, J., dissenting).For all these reasons, we hold that Ohio law does not 
violate the Failure-to-Vote Clause. 
IIIWe similarly reject respondents’ argument that Ohio 
violates other provisions of the NVRA and HAVA. 
ARespondents contend that Ohio removes registered 
voters on a ground not permitted by the NVRA.  They 
claim that the NVRA permits the removal of a name for 
only a few specified reasons—a person’s request, criminal 
conviction, mental incapacity, death, change of residence, 
and initial ineligibility.  Brief for Respondents 25–26; see 
52 U. S. C. §§20507(a)(3), (4).5  And they argue that Ohio 
—————— 
5 We assume for the sake of argument that Congress has the constitu-
 Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 17
Opinion of the Court 
removes registrants for other reasons, namely, for failing 
to respond to a notice and failing to vote.This argument plainly fails.  Ohio simply treats the 
failure to return a notice and the failure to vote as evi-
dence that a registrant has moved, not as a ground for 
removal.  And in doing this, Ohio simply follows federal 
law.  Subsection (d), which governs removals “on the 
ground that the registrant has changed residence,” treats 
the failure to return a notice and the failure to vote as 
evidence that this ground is satisfied.  §20507(d)(1).If respondents’ argument were correct, then it would 
also be illegal to remove a name under §20507(c) because 
that would constitute removal for submitting change-of-
address information to the Postal Service.  Likewise, if a 
State removed a name after receiving a death certificate or 
a judgment of criminal conviction, that would be illegal 
because receipt of such documents is not listed as a 
permitted ground for removal under §20507(a)(3) or 
§20507(a)(4).  About this argument no more need be said. 
BRespondents maintain, finally, that Ohio’s procedure is 
illegal because the State sends out notices without having 
any “reliable indicator” that the addressee has moved.  
Brief for Respondents 31.  The “[f]ailure to vote for a mere 
two-year period,” they argue, does not reliably “indicate 
that a registrant has moved out of the jurisdiction.”  Id., at 
30; see also, e.g., Brief for State of New York et al. as 
Amici Curiae 13–28.This argument also fails.  The degree of correlation 
between the failure to vote for two years and a change of 
residence is debatable, but we know from subsection (d) 
that Congress thought that the failure to vote for a period 
—————— 
tional authority to limit voting eligibility requirements in the way 
respondents suggest. 
18 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
Opinion of the Court 
of two consecutive general elections was a good indicator 
of change of residence, since it made nonvoting for that 
period an element of subsection (d)’s requirements for 
removal.  In a similar vein, the Ohio Legislature appar- 
ently thought that nonvoting for two years was sufficiently 
correlated with a change of residence to justify sending a 
return card.What matters for present purposes is not whether the 
Ohio Legislature overestimated the correlation between 
nonvoting and moving or whether it reached a wise policy 
judgment about when return cards should be sent.  For us, 
all that matters is that no provision of the NVRA prohibits 
the legislature from implementing that judgment.  Neither 
subsection (d) nor any other provision of the NVRA de-
mands that a State have some particular quantum of 
evidence of a change of residence before sending a regis-
trant a return card.  So long as the trigger for sending 
such notices is “uniform, nondiscriminatory, and in com-
pliance with the Voting Rights Act,” §20507(b)(1), States 
can use whatever plan they think best.  That may be why 
not even the Sixth Circuit relied on this rationale.Respondents attempt to find support for their argument 
in subsection (c), which allows States to send notices based 
on Postal Service change-of-address information.  This 
provision, they argue, implicitly sets a minimum reliabil-
ity requirement.  Thus, they claim, a State may not send 
out a return card unless its evidence of change of resi-
dence is at least as probative as the information obtained 
from the Postal Service.  See Tr. of Oral Arg. 56.Nothing in subsection (c) suggests that it is designed to 
play this role.  Subsection (c) says that “[a] State may 
meet” its obligation “to remove the names” of ineligible 
voters on change-of-residence grounds by sending notices 
to voters who are shown by the Postal Service information 
to have moved, but subsection (c) does not even hint that it 
imposes any sort of minimum reliability requirement forCite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 19
Opinion of the Court 
sending such notices.  §§20507(a)(4), (c).  By its terms, 
subsection (c) simply provides one way—the minimal 
way—in which a State “may meet the [NVRA’s] require-
ment[s]” for change-of-residence removals.  §20507(c) 
(emphasis added).  As respondents agreed at argument, it 
is not the only way.  Tr. of Oral Arg. 53. 
CNothing in the two dissents changes our analysis of the 
statutory language. 
1Despite its length and complexity, the principal dissent 
sets out only two arguments.  See post, at 7–8 (opinion of 
BREYER, J.).  The first is one that we have already dis-
cussed at length, namely, that the Failure-to-Vote Clause 
prohibits any use of the failure to vote except as permitted 
by subsections (c) and (d).  We have explained why this 
argument is insupportable, supra, at 12–16, and the dis-
sent has no answer to any of the problems we identify.The dissent’s only other argument is that Ohio’s process 
violates §20507(a)(4), which requires States to make a 
“reasonable effort” to remove the names of ineligible voters 
from the rolls.  The dissent thinks that this provision 
authorizes the federal courts to go beyond the restrictions 
set out in subsections (b), (c), and (d) and to strike down 
any state law that does not meet their own standard of 
“reasonableness.”  But see Brief for United States as 
Amicus Curiae 28–29.  The dissent contends that Ohio’s 
system violates this supposed “reasonableness” require-
ment primarily because it relies on the failure to mail back 
the postcard sent to those who have not engaged in voter 
activity for two years.  Based on its own cobbled-together 
statistics, post, at 12–13, and a feature of human nature of 
which the dissent has apparently taken judicial notice 
(i.e., “the human tendency not to send back cards received 
20 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
Opinion of the Court 
in the mail,” post, at 13), the dissent argues that the fail-
ure to send back the card in question “has no tendency to 
reveal accurately whether the registered voter has 
changed residences”; it is an “irrelevant factor” that 
“shows nothing at all that is statutorily significant.”  Post, 
at 13–14, 17.Whatever the meaning of §20507(a)(4)’s reference to 
reasonableness, the principal dissent’s argument fails 
since it is the federal NVRA, not Ohio law, that attaches 
importance to the failure to send back the card.  See 
§§20507(d)(1)(B)(i), (d)(2)(A).  The dissenters may not 
think that the failure to send back the card means any-
thing, but that was not Congress’s view.  The NVRA plainly 
reflects Congress’s judgment that the failure to send back 
the card, coupled with the failure to vote during the period 
covering the next two general federal elections, is signifi-
cant evidence that the addressee has moved.It is not our prerogative to judge the reasonableness of 
that congressional judgment, but we note that, whatever 
the general “human tendency” may be with respect to 
mailing back cards received in the mail, the notice sent 
under subsection (d) is nothing like the solicitations for 
commercial products or contributions that recipients may 
routinely discard.  The notice in question here warns 
recipients that unless they take the simple and easy step 
of mailing back the preaddressed, postage prepaid card—
or take the equally easy step of updating their information 
online—their names may be removed from the voting rolls 
if they do not vote during the next four years.  See Record 
295–296, 357.  It was Congress’s judgment that a reasona-
ble person with an interest in voting is not likely to ignore 
notice of this sort. 
2JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR’s dissent says nothing about what 
is relevant in this case—namely, the language of theCite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 21
Opinion of the Court 
NVRA—but instead accuses us of “ignor[ing] the history of 
voter suppression” in this country and of “uphold[ing] a 
program that appears to further the . . . disenfranchise-
ment of minority and low-income voters.”  Post, at 5.  
Those charges are misconceived.The NVRA prohibits state programs that are discrimi-
natory, see §20507(b)(1), but respondents did not assert a 
claim under that provision.  And JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR has 
not pointed to any evidence in the record that Ohio insti-
tuted or has carried out its program with discriminatory 
intent. 
*  *  *The dissents have a policy disagreement, not just with 
Ohio, but with Congress.  But this case presents a ques-
tion of statutory interpretation, not a question of policy.  
We have no authority to second-guess Congress or to 
decide whether Ohio’s Supplemental Process is the ideal 
method for keeping its voting rolls up to date.  The only 
question before us is whether it violates federal law.  It 
does not.The judgment of the Sixth Circuit is reversed.
It is so ordered.Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 1
THOMAS, J., concurring 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
_________________ 
No. 16–980 
_________________ 
JON HUSTED, OHIO SECRETARY OF STATE, 
PETITIONER v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH 
INSTITUTE, ET AL. 
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 
APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT 
[June 11, 2018]THOMAS, J., concurring.I join the Court’s opinion in full.  I write separately to 
add that respondents’ proposed interpretation of the Na-
tional Voter Registration Act (NVRA) should also be re-
jected because it would raise significant constitutional 
concerns.Respondents would interpret the NVRA to prevent 
States from using failure to vote as evidence when decid-
ing whether their voting qualifications have been satisfied.  
Brief for Respondents 25–30.  The Court’s opinion explains 
why that reading is inconsistent with the text of the 
NVRA.  See ante, at 7–18.  But even if the NVRA were 
“susceptible” to respondents’ reading, it could not prevail 
because it “raises serious constitutional doubts” that the 
Court’s interpretation avoids.  Jennings v. Rodriguez, 583 
U. S. ___, ___ (2018) (slip op., at 2).As I have previously explained, constitutional text and 
history both “confirm that States have the exclusive au-
thority to set voter qualifications and to determine whether 
those qualifications are satisfied.”  Arizona v. Inter 
Tribal Council of Ariz., Inc., 570 U. S. 1, 29 (2013) 
(THOMAS, J., dissenting).  The Voter-Qualifications Clause 
provides that, in elections for the House of Representa-
tives, “the Electors in each State shall have the Qualifica-
2 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
THOMAS, J., concurring 
tions requisite for Electors of the most numerous Branch 
of the State Legislature.”  U. S. Const., Art. I, §2, cl. 1.  
The Seventeenth Amendment imposes an identical re-
quirement for elections of Senators.  And the Constitution 
recognizes the authority of States to “appoint” Presidential 
electors “in such Manner as the Legislature thereof may 
direct.”  Art. II, §1, cl. 2; see Inter Tribal Council of Ariz., 
570 U. S., at 35, n. 2 (opinion of THOMAS, J.).  States thus 
retain the authority to decide the qualifications to vote in 
federal elections, limited only by the requirement that 
they not “ ‘establish special requirements’ ” for congres-
sional elections “ ‘that do not apply in elections for the 
state legislature.’ ”  Id., at 26 (quoting U. S. Term Limits, 
Inc. v. Thornton, 514 U. S. 779, 865 (1995) (THOMAS, J., 
dissenting)).  And because the power to establish require-
ments would mean little without the ability to enforce 
them, the Voter Qualifications Clause also “gives States 
the authority . . . to verify whether [their] qualifications 
are satisfied.”  570 U. S., at 28.Respondents’ reading of the NVRA would seriously 
interfere with the States’ constitutional authority to set 
and enforce voter qualifications.  To vote in Ohio, electors 
must have been a state resident 30 days before the elec-
tion, as well as a resident of the county and precinct where 
they vote.  Ohio Rev. Code Ann. §3503.01(A) (Lexis 2015); 
see also Ohio Const., Art. V, §1.  Ohio uses a record of 
nonvoting as one piece of evidence that voters no longer 
satisfy the residence requirement.  Reading the NVRA to 
bar Ohio from considering nonvoting would therefore 
interfere with the State’s “authority to verify” that its 
qualifications are met “in the way it deems necessary.”  
Inter Tribal Council of Ariz., supra, at 36.  Respondents’ 
reading thus renders the NVRA constitutionally suspect 
and should be disfavored.  See Jennings, supra, at ___ (slip 
op., at 2).Respondents counter that Congress’ power to regulateCite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 3
THOMAS, J., concurring 
the “Times, Places and Manner” of holding congressional 
elections includes the power to impose limits on the evi-
dence that a State may consider when maintaining its 
voter rolls.  See Brief for Respondents 51–55; see also 
Art. I, §4, cl. 1 (“The Times, Places and Manner of holding 
Elections for Senators and Representatives, shall be pre-
scribed in each State by the Legislature thereof; but the 
Congress may at any time by Law make or alter such 
Regulations, except as to the Places of chusing Senators”).  
But, as originally understood, the Times, Places and Man-
ner Clause grants Congress power “only over the ‘when, 
where, and how’ of holding congressional elections,” not 
over the question of who can vote.  Inter Tribal Council of 
Ariz., supra, at 29 (opinion of THOMAS, J.) (quoting T. 
Parsons, Notes of Convention Debates, Jan. 16, 1788, in 6 
Documentary History of the Ratification of the Constitu-
tion 1211 (J. Kaminski & G. Saladino eds. 2000) (Massa-
chusetts ratification delegate Sedgwick)).  The “ ‘Manner of 
holding Elections’ ” was understood to refer to “the circum-
stances under which elections were held and the mechan-
ics of the actual election.”  570 U. S., at 30 (quoting Art. I, 
§4, cl. 1).  It does not give Congress the authority to dis-
place state voter qualifications or dictate what evidence a 
State may consider in deciding whether those qualifica-
tions have been met.  See 570 U. S., at 29–33.  The Clause 
thus does not change the fact that respondents’ reading of 
the NVRA is constitutionally suspect.The Court’s interpretation of the NVRA was already the 
correct reading of the statute: The NVRA does not prohibit 
a State from considering failure to vote as evidence that a 
registrant has moved.  The fact that this reading avoids 
serious constitutional problems is an additional reason 
why, in my view, today’s decision is undoubtedly correct.Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 1
BREYER, J., dissenting 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
_________________ 
No. 16–980 
_________________ 
JON HUSTED, OHIO SECRETARY OF STATE, 
PETITIONER v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH 
INSTITUTE, ET AL. 
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 
APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT 
[June 11, 2018]JUSTICE BREYER, with whom JUSTICE GINSBURG, 
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, and JUSTICE KAGAN join, dissenting.Section 8 of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 
requires States to “conduct a general program that makes 
a reasonable effort to remove the names of ineligible vot-
ers from the official lists of eligible voters by reason of . . . 
a change in the residence of the registrant.”  §8(a)(4), 107 
Stat. 82–83, 52 U. S. C. §20507(a)(4).  This case concerns 
the State of Ohio’s change-of-residence removal program 
(called the “Supplemental Process”), under which a regis-
tered voter’s failure to vote in a single federal election 
begins a process that may well result in the removal of 
that voter’s name from the federal voter rolls.  See infra, 
at 7.  The question is whether the Supplemental Process 
violates §8, which prohibits a State from removing regis-
trants from the federal voter roll “by reason of the person’s 
failure to vote.”  §20507(b)(2).  In my view, Ohio’s program 
does just that.  And I shall explain why and how that is so. 
IThis case concerns the manner in which States maintain 
federal voter registration lists.  In the late 19th and early 
20th centuries, a number of “[r]estrictive registration laws 
and administrative procedures” came into use across the 
2 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
BREYER, J., dissenting 
United States—from literacy tests to the poll tax and from 
strict residency requirements to “selective purges.”  H. R. 
Rep. No. 103–9, p. 2 (1993).  Each was designed “to keep 
certain groups of citizens from voting” and “discourage 
participation.”  Ibid.  By 1965, the Voting Rights Act 
abolished some of the “more obvious impediments to regis-
tration,” but still, in 1993, Congress concluded that it had 
“unfinished business” to attend to in this domain.  Id., at 
3.  That year, Congress enacted the National Voter Regis-
tration Act “to protect the integrity of the electoral pro-
cess,” “increase the number of eligible citizens who regis-
ter to vote in elections for Federal office,” and “ensure that 
accurate and current voter registration rolls are main-
tained.”  §20501(b).  It did so mindful that “the purpose of 
our election process is not to test the fortitude and deter-
mination of the voter, but to discern the will of the majority.”  
S. Rep. No. 103–6, p. 3 (1993).In accordance with these aims, §8 of the Registration 
Act sets forth a series of requirements that States must 
satisfy in their “administration of voter registration for 
elections for Federal office.”  §20507.  Ohio’s Supplemental 
Process fails to comport with these requirements; it erects 
needless hurdles to voting of the kind Congress sought to 
eliminate by enacting the Registration Act.  Four of §8’s 
provisions are critical to this case: subsections (a), (b), (c), 
and (d).  The text of each subsection is detailed and con-
tains multiple parts.  Given the complexity of the statute, 
readers should consult these provisions themselves (see 
Appendix A, infra, at 21–24) and try to keep the thrust of 
those provisions in mind while reading this opinion.  At 
the outset, I shall address each of them. 
A 
1We begin with subsection (a)’s “Reasonable Program” 
requirement.  That provision says that “each State shall”:Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 3
BREYER, J., dissenting 
“conduct a general program that makes a reasonable 
effort to remove the names of ineligible voters from 
the official lists of eligible voters by reason of . . . a 
change in the residence of the registrant, in accord-
ance with subsections (b), (c), and (d).”  §20507(a)(4). 
This provision tells each State that it must try to remove 
ineligible voters from the rolls, that it must act reasonably 
in doing so, and that, when it does so, it must follow the 
rules contained in the next three subsections of §8—
namely, subsections (b), (c), and (d). 
2Subsection (b)’s “Failure-to-Vote” Clause generally 
forbids state change-of-residence removal programs that 
rely upon a registrant’s failure to vote as a basis for re-
moving the registrant’s name from the federal voter roll.  
Before 1993, when Congress enacted this prohibition, 
many States would assume a registered voter had changed 
his address, and consequently remove that voter from the 
rolls, simply because the registrant had failed to vote.  
Recognizing that many registered voters who do not vote 
“may not have moved,” S. Rep. No. 103–6, at 17, Congress 
consequently prohibited States from using the failure to 
vote as a proxy for moving and thus a basis for purging the 
voter’s name from the rolls.  The Failure-to-Vote Clause, as 
originally enacted, said: 
“Any State program or activity to protect the integrity 
of the electoral process by ensuring the maintenance 
of an accurate and current voter registration roll for 
elections for Federal office . . . shall not result in the 
removal of the name of any person from the official 
list of voters registered to vote in an election for Fed-
eral office by reason of the person’s failure to vote.”  
107 Stat. 83; see §20507(b)(2).As I shall discuss, Congress later clarified that “using 
4 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
BREYER, J., dissenting 
the procedures described in subsections (c) and (d) to 
remove an individual” from the federal voter roll is per-
missible and does not violate the Failure-to-Vote Clause.  
See §8(b)(2) of the National Voter Registration Act, 107 
Stat. 83, and as amended, 116 Stat. 1728, 52 U. S. C. 
§20507(b)(2). 
3Subsection (c), which is entitled “Voter Removal Pro-
grams,” explains how “[a] State may meet the requirement 
of subsection (a)(4).”  §20507(c)(1).  Because subsection 
(a)(4) itself incorporates all of the relevant requirements of 
subsections (b), (c), and (d) within it, see §20507(a)(4), 
subsection (c) sets forth one way a State can comply with 
the basic requirements of §8 at issue in this case (includ-
ing subsection (b)).  A State’s removal program qualifies 
under subsection (c) if the following two things are true 
about the program:“(A) change-of-address information supplied by the 
Postal Service through its licensees is used to identify 
registrants whose addresses may have changed; and“(B) if it appears [that] the registrant has moved to 
a different residence address not in the same regis-
trar’s jurisdiction, the registrar uses the notice proce-
dure described in subsection (d)(2) to confirm the 
change of address.”  §20507(c)(1). 
The upshot is that subsection (c) explains one way a State 
may comply with subsection (a)’s Reasonable Program 
requirement without violating subsection (b)’s Failure-to-
Vote prohibition.  It is a roadmap that points to a two-step 
removal process.  At step 1, States first identify registered 
voters whose addresses may have changed; here, subsec-
tion (c) points to one (but not the only) method a State 
may use to do so.  At step 2, subsection (c) explains,  
States must “confirm the change of address” by using a 
special notice procedure, which is further described inCite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 5
BREYER, J., dissenting 
subsection (d). 
4Subsection (d) sets forth the final procedure, which Ohio 
refers to as the “Confirmation Procedure.”  Brief for Peti-
tioner 7.  The statute makes clear that a State must use 
the Confirmation Procedure to “confirm” a change of ad-
dress in respect to any registered voter it initially identi-
fies as someone who has likely changed addresses.  It 
works as follows: the State must send the registrant iden-
tified as having likely moved a special kind of notice by 
forwardable mail.  That notice must warn the registrant 
that his or her name will be removed from the voter roll 
unless the registrant either returns an attached card and 
confirms his or her current address in writing or votes in 
an election during the period covering the next two federal 
elections.  In a sense, the notice a State is required to send 
as part of the Confirmation Procedure gives registered 
voters whom the State has identified as likely ineligible a 
“last chance” to correct the record before being removed from 
the federal registration list.  The Confirmation Procedure is 
mandatory for all change-of-residence removals, regard-
less of the method the State uses to make its initial identi-
fication of registrants whose addresses may have changed.  
In particular, subsection (d) says:“A State shall not remove the name of a registrant 
from the official list of eligible voters . . . on the 
ground that the registrant has changed residence un-
less the registrant [either]—“(A) confirms in writing that the registrant has 
changed residence to a place outside the registrar’s ju-
risdiction in which the registrant is registered; or“(B)(i) has failed to respond to a notice described in 
[subsection (d)(2)]; and (ii) has not voted [in two sub-
sequent federal elections].”  §20507(d)(1). 
6 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
BREYER, J., dissentingSubsection (d)(2) then goes on to describe (in consider- 
able detail) the “last chance” notice the State must send to 
the registrant.  In particular, the notice must be sent by 
forwardable mail so that the notice will reach the regis-
trant even if the registrant has changed addresses.  It 
must include a postage-prepaid, preaddressed “return 
card” that the registrant may send back to the State to 
confirm or correct the State’s record of his or her current 
address.  And, the notice must warn the registrant that 
unless the card is returned, if the registrant does not vote 
in the next two federal elections, then his or her name will 
be removed from the list of eligible voters. 
*  *  *In sum, §8 tells States the following: 
• In general, establish a removal-from-registration 
program that “makes a reasonable effort” to remove 
voters who become ineligible because they change 
residences. 
• Do not target registered voters for removal from 
the registration roll because they have failed to 
vote.  However, “using the procedures described in 
subsections (c) and (d) to remove an individual” 
from the federal voter roll is permissible and does 
not violate the Failure-to-Vote prohibition. 
• The procedures described in subsections (c) and (d) 
consist of a two-step removal process in which at 
step 1, the State uses change-of-address infor-
mation (which the State may obtain, for instance, 
from the Postal Service) to identify registrants 
whose addresses may have changed; and then at 
step 2, the State must use the mandatory “last 
chance” notice procedure described in subsection 
(d) to confirm the change of address. 
• The “last chance” confirmation notice must be sent 
by forwardable mail.  It must also include a postage-
 Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 7
BREYER, J., dissenting 
prepaid, preaddressed “return card” that the regis-
trant may send back to the State verifying his or 
her current address.  And it must warn the regis-
trant that unless the card is returned, if the regis-
trant does not vote in the next two federal elec-
tions, then his or her name will be removed from 
the list of eligible voters. 
BThe Supplemental Process, Ohio’s program for removing 
registrants from the federal rolls on the ground that the 
voter has changed his address, is much simpler.  Each of 
Ohio’s 88 boards of elections sends its version of subsec-
tion (d)’s “last chance” notice to those on a list “of individ-
uals who, according to the board’s records, have not en-
gaged in certain kinds of voter activity”—including 
“casting a ballot”—for a period of “generally two years.”  
Record 1507.  Accordingly, each board’s list can include 
registered voters who failed to vote in a single federal 
election.  And anyone on the list who “continues to be 
inactive” by failing to vote for the next “four consecutive 
years, including two federal elections,” and fails to respond 
to the notice is removed from the federal voter roll.  Id., at 
1509.  Under the Supplemental Process, a person’s failure 
to vote is the sole basis on which the State identifies a 
registrant as a person whose address may have changed 
and the sole reason Ohio initiates a registered voter’s 
removal using subsection (d)’s Confirmation Procedure. 
IISection 8 requires that Ohio’s program “mak[e] a rea-
sonable effort to remove” ineligible registrants from the 
rolls because of “a change in the residence of the regis-
trant,” and it must do so “in accordance with subsections 
(b), (c), and (d).”  §20507(a)(4)(B).  In my view, Ohio’s 
program is unlawful under §8 in two respects.  It first 
8 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
BREYER, J., dissenting 
violates subsection (b)’s Failure-to-Vote prohibition be-
cause Ohio uses nonvoting in a manner that is expressly 
prohibited and not otherwise authorized under §8.  In 
addition, even if that were not so, the Supplemental Pro-
cess also fails to satisfy subsection (a)’s Reasonable Pro-
gram requirement, since using a registrant’s failure to 
vote is not a reasonable method for identifying voters 
whose registrations are likely invalid (because they have 
changed their addresses).First, as to subsection (b)’s Failure-to-Vote Clause, 
recall that Ohio targets for removal registrants who fail to 
vote.  In identifying registered voters who have likely 
changed residences by looking to see if those registrants 
failed to vote, Ohio’s program violates subsection (b)’s 
express prohibition on “[a]ny State program or activity 
[that] result[s] in the removal” of a registered voter “by 
reason of the person’s failure to vote.”  §20507(b)(2) (em-
phasis added).  In my view, these words are most naturally 
read to prohibit a State from considering a registrant’s 
failure to vote as part of any process “that is used to start, 
or has the effect of starting, a purge of the voter rolls.”  
H. R. Rep. No. 103–9, at 15.  In addition, Congress enacted 
the Failure-to-Vote Clause to prohibit “the elimination of 
names of voters from the rolls solely due to [a registrant’s] 
failure to respond to a mailing.”  Ibid.  But that is precisely 
what Ohio’s Supplemental Process does.  The program 
violates subsection (b)’s prohibition because under it, a 
registrant who fails to vote in a single federal election, 
fails to respond to a forwardable notice, and fails to vote 
for another four years may well be purged.  Record 1508.  
If the registrant had voted at any point, the registrant 
would not have been removed.  See supra, at 7; infra, at 
11–14.Ohio does use subsection (d)’s Confirmation Procedure, 
but that procedure alone does not satisfy §8’s require-
ments.  How do we know that Ohio’s use of the Confirma-
 Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 9
BREYER, J., dissenting 
tion Procedure alone cannot count as statutorily signifi-
cant?  The statute’s basic structure along with its lan-
guage makes clear that this is so.In respect to language, §8 says that the function of 
subsection (d)’s Confirmation Procedure is “to confirm the 
change of address” whenever the State has already “iden-
tif[ied] registrants whose addresses may have changed.”  
§§20507(c)(1)(A), (d)(2).  The function of the Confirmation 
Procedure is not to make the initial identification of regis-
trants whose addresses may have changed.  As a matter of 
English usage, you cannot confirm that an event happened 
without already having some reason to believe at least 
that it might have happened.  Black’s Law Dictionary 298 
(6th ed. 1990) (defining “confirm” as meaning “[t]o com-
plete or establish that which was imperfect or uncertain”).Ohio, of course, says that it has a ground for believing 
that those persons they remove from the rolls have, in 
fact, changed their address, but the ground is the fact that 
the person did not vote—the very thing that the Failure-
to-Vote Clause forbids Ohio to use as a basis for removing 
a registered voter from the registration roll.In respect to structure, two statutory illustrations make 
clear what the word “confirm” already suggests, namely, 
that the Confirmation Procedure is a necessary but not a 
sufficient procedure for removing a registered voter from 
the voter roll.  The first illustration of how the Confirma-
tion Procedure is supposed to function appears in subsec-
tion (c), which describes a removal process under which 
the State first identifies registrants who have likely 
changed addresses and then “confirm[s]” that change of 
residence using the Confirmation Procedure and sending 
the required “last chance” notice.  §20507(c)(1) (emphasis 
added).  The identification method subsection (c) says a 
State may use is “change-of-address information supplied 
by the Postal Service.”  §20507(c)(1)(A).  A person does not 
notify the Postal Service that he is moving unless he is 
10 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
BREYER, J., dissenting 
likely to move or has already moved.  And, as the Regis-
tration Act says, “if it appears from change-of-address 
provided by the Postal Service that . . . the registrant has 
moved to a different residence not in the same registrar’s 
jurisdiction,” the State has a reasonable (hence acceptable) 
basis for “us[ing] the notice procedure described in sub- 
section (d)(2) to confirm the change of address.”  
§20507(c)(1)(B).The second illustration of how the Confirmation Proce-
dure is supposed to function appears in a portion of the 
statute I have not yet discussed—namely, §6 of the Na-
tional Voter Registration Act, which sets out the rules for 
voter registration by mail.  See §6, 107 Stat. 80, 52 
U. S. C. §20505.  In particular, §6(d), entitled “Undeliv-
ered Notices,” says that, “[i]f a notice of the disposition of a 
mail voter registration application . . . is sent by nonfor-
wardable mail and is returned undelivered,” at that point 
the State “may proceed in accordance with section 8(d),” 
namely, the Confirmation Procedure, and send the same 
“last chance” notice that I have just discussed.  §20505(d) 
(emphasis added).Note that §6(d) specifies a nonforwardable mailing—and 
not a forwardable mailing, like one specified in §8(d).  This 
distinction matters.  Why?  If a person moves, a forward- 
able mailing will be sent along (i.e., “forwarded”) to that 
person’s new address; in contrast, a nonforwardable mail-
ing will not be forwarded to the person’s new address but 
instead will be returned to the sender and marked “unde-
liverable.”  And so a nonforwardable mailing that is re-
turned to the sender marked “undeliverable” indicates 
that the intended recipient may have moved.  After all, the 
Postal Service, as the majority points out, returns mail 
marked “undeliverable” if the intended recipient has 
moved—not if the person still lives at his old address.  
Ante, at 6, and n. 3.Under §6(d), the Registration Act expressly endorsesCite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 11
BREYER, J., dissenting 
nonforwardable mailings as a reasonable method for 
States to use at step 1 to identify registrants whose ad-
dresses may have changed before the State proceeds to 
step 2 and sends the forwardable notice required under 
subsection (d)’s Confirmation Procedure.  Specifically, 
§6(d) explains that, if a State sends its registrants a mail-
ing by nonforwardable mail (which States often do), and if 
“[that mailing] is returned undelivered,” the State has a 
fairly good reason for believing that the person has moved 
and therefore “may proceed in accordance with” §8(d) by 
sending the “last chance” forwardable notice that the 
Confirmation Procedure requires.  §20505(d).  In contrast 
to a nonforwardable notice that is returned undeliverable, 
which tells the State that a registrant has likely moved, a 
forwardable notice that elicits no response whatsoever 
tells the State close to nothing at all.  That is because, as I 
shall discuss, most people who receive confirmation notices 
from the State simply do not send back the “return card” 
attached to that mailing—whether they have moved or 
not.In sum, §6(d), just like §§8(a) and 8(c), indicates that the 
State, as an initial matter, must use a reasonable method 
to identify a person who has likely moved and then must 
send that person a confirmatory notice that will in effect 
give him a “last chance” to remain on the rolls.  And these 
provisions thus tend to deny, not to support, the majority’s 
suggestion that somehow sending a “last chance” notice is 
itself a way (other than nonvoting) to identify someone 
who has likely moved.I concede that some individuals who have, in fact, 
moved do, in fact, send a return card back to the State 
making clear that they have moved.  And some registrants 
do send back a card saying that they have not moved.  
Thus, the Confirmation Procedure will sometimes help 
provide confirmation of what the initial identification 
procedure is supposed to accomplish: finding registrants 
12 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
BREYER, J., dissenting 
who have probably moved.  But more often than not, the 
State fails to receive anything back from the registrant, 
and the fact that the State hears nothing from the regis-
trant essentially proves nothing at all.Anyone who doubts this last statement need simply 
consult figures in the record along with a few generally 
available statistics.  As a general matter, the problem 
these numbers reveal is as follows: Very few registered 
voters move outside of their county of registration.  But 
many registered voters fail to vote.  Most registered voters 
who fail to vote also fail to respond to the State’s “last 
chance” notice.  And the number of registered voters who 
both fail to vote and fail to respond to the “last chance” 
notice exceeds the number of registered voters who move 
outside of their county each year.Consider the following facts.  First, Ohio tells us that a 
small number of Americans—about 4% of all Americans—
move outside of their county each year.  Record 376.  (The 
majority suggests the relevant number is 10%, ante, at 2, 
but that includes people who move within their county.)  
At the same time, a large number of American voters fail 
to vote, and Ohio voters are no exception.  In 2014, around 
59% of Ohio’s registered voters failed to vote.  See Brief for 
League of Women Voters et al. as Amici Curiae 16, and 
n. 12 (citing Ohio Secretary of State, 2014 Official Election 
Results).Although many registrants fail to vote and only a small 
number move, under the Supplemental Process, Ohio uses 
a registrant’s failure to vote to identify that registrant as a 
person whose address has likely changed.  The record 
shows that in 2012 Ohio identified about 1.5 million regis-
tered voters—nearly 20% of its 8 million registered vot-
ers—as likely ineligible to remain on the federal voter roll 
because they changed their residences.  Record 475.  Ohio 
then sent those 1.5 million registered voters subsubsection 
(d) “last chance” confirmation notices.  In response toCite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 13
BREYER, J., dissenting 
those 1.5 million notices, Ohio only received back about 
60,000 return cards (or 4%) which said, in effect, “You are 
right, Ohio.  I have, in fact, moved.”  Ibid.  In addition, 
Ohio received back about 235,000 return cards which said, 
in effect, “You are wrong, Ohio, I have not moved.”  In the 
end, however, there were more than 1,000,000 notices—the 
vast majority of notices sent—to which Ohio received back 
no return card at all.  Ibid.What about those registered voters—more than 1 mil-
lion strong—who did not send back their return cards?  Is 
there any reason at all (other than their failure to vote) to 
think they moved?  The answer to this question must be 
no.  There is no reason at all.  First, those 1 million or so 
voters accounted for about 13% of Ohio’s voting popula-
tion.  So if those 1 million or so registered voters (or even 
half of them) had, in fact, moved, then vastly more people 
must move each year in Ohio than is generally true of the 
roughly 4% of all Americans who move to a different county 
nationwide (not all of whom are registered voters).  See 
Id., at 376.  But there is no reason to think this.  Ohio 
offers no such reason.  And the streets of Ohio’s cities are 
not filled with moving vans; nor has Cleveland become the 
Nation’s residential moving companies’ headquarters.  
Thus, I think it fair to assume (because of the human 
tendency not to send back cards received in the mail, 
confirmed strongly by the actual numbers in this record) 
the following: In respect to change of residence, the failure 
of more than 1 million Ohio voters to respond to forward- 
able notices (the vast majority of those sent) shows nothing 
at all that is statutorily significant.To put the matter in the present statutory context: 
When a State relies upon a registrant’s failure to vote to 
initiate the Confirmation Procedure, it violates the Failure-
to-Vote Clause, and a State’s subsequent use of the Con-
firmation Procedure cannot save the State’s program from 
that defect.  Even if that were not so, a nonreturned con-
14 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
BREYER, J., dissenting 
firmation notice adds nothing to the State’s understanding 
of whether the voter has moved or not.  And that, I repeat, 
is because a nonreturned confirmation notice (as the num-
bers show) cannot reasonably indicate a change of address.Finally, let us return to §8’s basic mandate and purpose.  
Ohio’s program must “mak[e] a reasonable effort to remove 
the names of ineligible voters” from its federal rolls on 
change-of-residence grounds.  §20507(a)(4) (emphasis 
added).  Reasonableness under §8(a) is primarily meas-
ured in terms of the program’s compliance with “subsec-
tions (b), (c), and (d).”  §20507(a)(4)(B).  That includes the 
broad prohibition on removing registrants because of their 
failure to vote.  More generally, the statute seeks to “pro-
tect the integrity of the electoral process” and “ensure that 
accurate and current voter registration rolls are main-
tained.”  §§20501(b)(3), (4).  Ohio’s system adds to its non-
voting-based identification system a factor that has no 
tendency to reveal accurately whether the registered voter 
has changed residences.  Nothing plus one is still one.  
And, if that “one” consists of a failure to vote, then Ohio’s 
program also fails to make the requisite “reasonable ef-
fort” to comply with subsection (a)’s statutory mandate.  It 
must violate the statute. 
IIIThe majority tries to find support in two provisions of a 
different statute, namely, the Help America Vote Act of 
2002, 116 Stat. 1666, the pertinent part of which is re-
printed in Appendix B, infra, at 25–26.  The first is enti-
tled “Clarification of Ability of Election Officials To Re-
move Registrants From Official List of Voters on Grounds 
of Change of Residence.”  §903, id., at 1728.  That provi-
sion was added to the National Voter Registration Act’s 
Failure-to-Vote Clause, subsection (b)(2), which says that 
a State’s registrant removal program “shall not result in 
the removal of the name of any person from the official listCite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 15
BREYER, J., dissenting 
. . . by reason of the person’s failure to vote.”  §20507(b)(2); 
see supra, at 3.  The “Clarification” adds: 
“except that nothing in this paragraph may be con-
strued to prohibit a State from using the procedures 
described in subsections (c) and (d) to remove an indi-
vidual from the official list of eligible voters if the in-
dividual—(A) has not either notified the applicable 
registrar (in person or in writing) or responded . . . to 
the [confirmation] notice sent by the applicable regis-
trar; and then (B) has not voted or appeared to vote in 
2 or more consecutive general elections for Federal of-
fice.”  §903, id., at 1728 (emphasis added).This amendment simply clarified that the use of nonvot-
ing specified in subsections (c) and (d) does not violate the 
Failure-to-Vote Clause.  The majority asks why, if the 
matter is so simple, Congress added the new language at 
all.  The answer to this question is just what the title 
attached to the new language says, namely, Congress 
added the new language for purposes of clarification.  And 
the new language clarified any confusion States may have 
had about the relationship between, on the one hand, 
subsection (b)’s broad prohibition on any use of a person’s 
failure to vote in removal programs and, on the other 
hand, the requirement in subsections (c) and (d) that a 
State consider whether a registrant has failed to vote at 
the end of the Confirmation Procedure.  This reading finds 
support in several other provisions in both the National 
Voter Registration Act and the Help America Vote  
Act, which make similar clarifications.  See, e.g., 
§20507(c)(2)(B) (clarifying that a particular prohibition 
“shall not be construed to preclude” States from comply- 
ing with separate statutory obligations); see also 
§§20510(d)(2) (similar rule of construction), 21081(c)(1), 
21083(a)(1)(B), (a)(2)(A)(iii), (b)(5), (d)(1)(A)–(B); 21084.The majority also points out that another provision of 
16 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
BREYER, J., dissenting 
the Help America Vote Act, §303.  See §303(a)(4), 116 Stat. 
1708, 52 U. S. C. §21083(a)(4).  That provision once again 
reaffirms that a State’s registration list-maintenance 
program must “mak[e] a reasonable effort to remove regis-
trants who are ineligible to vote” and adds that “consistent 
with the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 . . . regis-
trants who have not responded to a notice and who have 
not voted in 2 consecutive general elections for Federal 
office shall be removed from the official list of eligible 
voters, except that no registrant may be removed solely by 
reason of a failure to vote.”  §21083(a)(4)(A) (emphasis 
added).The majority tries to make much of the word “solely.”  
But the majority makes too much of too little.  For one 
thing, the Registration Act’s Failure-to-Vote Clause under 
subsection (b) does not use the word “solely.”  And §303 of 
the Help America Vote Act tells us to interpret its lan-
guage (which includes the word “solely”) “consistent with 
the” Registration Act.  §21083(a)(4)(A).  For another, the 
Help America Vote Act says that “nothing in this [Act] 
may be construed to authorize or require conduct prohib- 
ited under [the National Voter Registration Act], or to su- 
persede, restrict or limit the application of . . . [t]he Na-
tional Voter Registration Act.”  §21145(a)(4).The majority’s view of the statute leaves the Registra-
tion Act’s Failure-to-Vote Clause with nothing to do in 
respect to change-of-address programs.  Let anyone who 
doubts this read subsection (d) (while remaining aware of 
the fact that it requires the sending of a confirmation 
notice) and ask himself or herself: What else is there for 
the Failure-to-Vote Clause to do?  The answer is nothing.  
Section 8(d) requires States to send a confirmation notice 
for all change-of-address removals, and, in the majority’s 
view, failing to respond to that forwardable notice is al-
ways a valid cause for removal, even if that notice was 
sent by reason of the registrant’s initial failure to vote. Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 17
BREYER, J., dissenting 
Thus the Failure-to-Vote Clause is left with no independ-
ent weight since complying with subsection (d) shields a 
State from violating subsection (b).  To repeat the point, 
under the majority’s view, the Failure-to-Vote Clause is 
superfluous in respect to change-of-address programs: 
subsection (d) already accomplishes everything the major- 
ity says is required of a State’s removal program—namely, 
the sending of a notice.Finally, even if we were to accept the majority’s premise 
that the question here is whether Ohio’s system removes 
registered voters from the registration list “solely by rea-
son of a failure to vote,” that would not change anything.  
As I have argued, Part II, supra, the failure to respond to 
a forwardable notice is an irrelevant factor in terms of 
what it shows about whether that registrant changed his 
or her residence.  To add an irrelevant factor to a failure to 
vote, say, a factor like having gone on vacation or having 
eaten too large a meal, cannot change Ohio’s sole use of 
“failure to vote” into something it is not. 
IVJUSTICE THOMAS, concurring, suggests that my reading 
of the statute “ ‘raises serious constitutional doubts.’ ”  
Ante, at 1 (quoting Jennings v. Rodriguez, 583 U. S. ___, 
___ (2018) (slip op., at 2)).  He believes that it “would 
seriously interfere with the States’ constitutional authority 
to set and enforce voter qualifications.”  Ante, at 2.  At the 
same time, the majority “assume[s]” that “Congress has 
the constitutional authority to limit voting eligibility 
requirements in the way respondents suggest.”  Ante, at 
16, n. 5.  But it suggests possible agreement with JUSTICE 
THOMAS, for it makes this assumption only “for the sake of 
argument.”  Ibid.Our cases indicate, however, that §8 neither exceeds 
Congress’ authority under the Elections Clause, Art. I, §4, 
nor interferes with the State’s authority under the Voter 
18 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
BREYER, J., dissenting 
Qualification Clause, Art. 1, §2.  Indeed, this Court’s 
precedents interpreting the scope of congressional authority 
under the Elections Clause make clear that Congress has 
the constitutional power to adopt the statute before us.The Elections Clause states: 
“The Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections 
for Senators and Representatives, shall be prescribed 
in each State by the Legislature thereof; but the Con-
gress may at any time by Law make or alter such 
Regulations, except as to the Places of chusing Sena-
tors.”  U. S. Const., Art. I, §4, cl. 1. 
The Court has frequently said that “[t]he Clause’s sub-
stantive scope is broad,” and that it “empowers Congress 
to pre-empt state regulations governing the ‘Times, Places 
and Manner’ of holding congressional elections.”  Arizona 
v. Inter Tribal Council of Ariz., Inc., 570 U. S. 1, 8 (2013).  
We have long held that “[t]he power of Congress over the 
‘Times, Places and Manner’ of congressional elections ‘is 
paramount, and may be exercised at any time, and to any 
extent which it deems expedient; and so far as it is exer-
cised, and no farther, the regulations effected supersede 
those of the State which are inconsistent therewith.’ ”  Id., 
at 9 (quoting Ex parte Siebold, 100 U. S. 371, 392 (1880)).The words “ ‘Times, Places, and Manner,’ ” we have said, 
are “ ‘comprehensive words’ ” that “ ‘embrace authority to 
provide a complete code for congressional elections.’ ”  
Tribal Council, supra, at 8–9 (quoting Smiley v. Holm, 285 
U. S. 355, 366 (1932)).  That “complete code” includes the 
constitutional authority to enact “regulations relating to 
‘registration.’ ”  Ibid.; see also Cook v. Gralike, 531 U. S. 
510, 524 (2001) (same); Roudebush v. Hartke, 405 U. S. 15, 
24–25 (1972).  That is precisely what §8 does.Neither does §8 tell the States “who may vote in” federal 
elections.  Tribal Council, 570 U. S., at 16.  Instead, §8 
considers the manner of registering those whom the StateCite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 19
BREYER, J., dissenting 
itself considers qualified.  Unlike the concurrence, I do not 
read our precedent as holding to the contrary.  But see id., 
at 26 (THOMAS, J., dissenting).  And, our precedent strongly 
suggests that, given the importance of voting in a democ-
racy, a State’s effort (because of failure to vote) to remove 
from a federal election roll those it considers otherwise 
qualified is unreasonable.  Cf. Carrington v. Rash, 380 
U. S. 89, 91–93, 96 (1965) (State can impose “reasonable 
residence restrictions on the availability of the ballot” but 
cannot forbid otherwise qualified members of military to 
vote); see also Kramer v. Union Free School Dist. No. 15, 
395 U. S. 621, 625 (1969) (“States have the power to im-
pose reasonable citizenship, age, and residency require-
ments on the availability of the ballot” (emphasis added)); 
Harper v. Virginia Bd. of Elections, 383 U. S. 663, 668 
(1966) (“To introduce wealth or payment of a fee as a 
measure of a voter’s qualifications is to introduce a capri-
cious or irrelevant factor”).For these reasons, with respect, I dissent. 
20 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
BREYER, J., dissenting 
APPENDIXES 
A 
The National Voter Registration Act of 1993
“SEC. 2.  FINDINGS AND PURPOSES. 
“(a) FINDINGS.—The Congress finds that—“(1) The right of citizens of the United States to vote is a 
fundamental right;“(2) it is the duty of the Federal, State, and local gov-
ernments to promote the exercise of that right; and“(3) discriminatory and unfair registration laws and 
procedures can have a direct and damaging effect on voter 
participation in elections for Federal office and dispropor-
tionately harm voter participation . . . , including racial 
minorities. 
“(b) PURPOSES.—The purposes of this Act are—“(1) to establish procedures that will increase the num-
ber of eligible citizens who register to vote in elections for 
Federal office;“(2) to make it possible for Federal, State, and local 
governments to implement this Act in a manner that 
enhances the participation of eligible citizens as voters in 
elections for Federal office;“(3) to protect the integrity of the electoral process; and“(4) to ensure that accurate and current voter registra-
tion rolls are maintained.”  107 Stat. 77.
“SEC. 5.  SIMULTANEOUS APPLICATION FOR VOTER 
REGISTRATION AND APPLICATION FOR MOTOR VEHICLE 
DRIVER’S LICENSE.“(d) CHANGE OF ADDRESS.—Any change of address form 
submitted in accordance with State law for purposes of a 
State motor vehicle driver's license shall serve as notifica-
tion of change of address for voter registration with re-
spect to elections for Federal office for the registrant in- 
Appendix A to opinion of BREYER, J.Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 21
BREYER, J., dissenting 
volved unless the registrant states on the form that the 
change of address is not for voter registration purposes.”  
Id., at 79.
“SEC. 6.  MAIL REGISTRATION.“(d) UNDELIVERED NOTICES.  If a notice of the disposi-
tion of a mail voter registration application under section 
8(a)(2) is sent by nonforwardable mail and is returned 
undelivered, the registrar may proceed in accordance with 
section 8(d).”  Id., at 80.
“SEC. 8.  REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT TO ADMINI- 
STRATION OF VOTER REGISTRATION.“(a) IN GENERAL—In the administration of voter regis-
tration for elections for Federal office, each State shall—“(1) ensure that any eligible applicant is registered to 
vote in an election— 
.      .      .      .      .“(2) require the appropriate State election official to 
send notice to each applicant of the disposition of the 
application;“(3) provide that the name of a registrant may not be 
removed from the official list of eligible voters except—“(A) at the request of the registrant;“(B) as provided by State law, by reason of criminal 
conviction or mental incapacity; or“(C) as provided under paragraph (4);“(4) conduct a general program that makes a reasonable 
effort to remove the names of ineligible voters from the 
official lists of eligible voters by reason of—“(A) the death of the registrant; or“(B) a change in the residence of the registrant, in ac-
cordance with subsections (b), (c), and (d); 
.      .      .      .      .“(b) CONFIRMATION OF VOTER REGISTRATION.—Any 
State program or activity to protect the integrity of the 
Appendix A to opinion of BREYER, J. 
22 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
BREYER, J., dissenting 
electoral process by ensuring the maintenance of an accu-
rate and current voter registration roll for elections for 
Federal office—“(1) shall be uniform, nondiscriminatory, and in compli-
ance with the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (42 U. S. C. 1973 
et seq.); and“(2) shall not result in the removal of the name of any 
person from the official list of voters registered to vote in 
an election for Federal office by reason of the person’s 
failure to vote.“(c) VOTER REMOVAL PROGRAMS.—(1) A State may meet 
the requirement of subsection (a)(4) by establishing a 
program under which—“(A) change-of-address information supplied by the 
Postal Service through its licensees is used to identify 
registrants whose addresses may have changed; and“(B) if it appears from information provided by the 
Postal Service that—“(i) a registrant has moved to a different residence ad-
dress in the same registrar's jurisdiction in which the 
registrant is currently registered, the registrar changes 
the registration records to show the new address and 
sends the registrant a notice of the change by forwardable 
mail and a postage prepaid pre-addressed return form by 
which the registrant may verify or correct the address 
information; or“(ii) the registrant has moved to a different residence 
address not in the same registrar's jurisdiction, the regis-
trar uses the notice procedure described in subsection 
(d)(2) to confirm the change of address.“(2)(A) A State shall complete, not later than 90 days 
prior to the date of a primary or general election for Fed-
eral office, any program the purpose of which is to system-
atically remove the names of ineligible voters from the 
official lists of eligible voters.“(B) Subparagraph (A) shall not be construed to pre- 
Appendix A to opinion of BREYER, J.
 Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 23
BREYER, J., dissenting 
clude—“(i) the removal of names from official lists of voters on a 
basis described in paragraph (3)(A) or (B) or (4)(A) of 
subsection (a); or“(ii) correction of registration records pursuant to this 
Act.“(d) REMOVAL OF NAMES FROM VOTING ROLLS.—“(1) A 
State shall not remove the name of a registrant from the 
official list of eligible voters in elections for Federal office 
on the ground that the registrant has changed residence 
unless the registrant—“(A) confirms in writing that the registrant has changed 
residence to a place outside the registrar’s jurisdiction in 
which the registrant is registered; or“(B)(i) has failed to respond to a notice described in 
paragraph (2); and“(ii) has not voted or appeared to vote (and, if necessary, 
correct the registrar's record of the registrant's address) in 
an election during the period beginning on the date of the 
notice and ending on the day after the date of the second 
general election for Federal office that occurs after the 
date of the notice.“(2) A notice is described in this paragraph if it is a 
postage prepaid and pre-addressed return card, sent by 
forwardable mail, on which the registrant may state his or 
her current address, together with a notice to the following 
effect:“(A) If the registrant did not change his or her residence, 
or changed residence but remained in the registrar’s juris-
diction, the registrant should return the card not later 
than the time provided for mail registration under subsec-
tion (a)(1)(B).  If the card is not returned, affirmation or 
confirmation of the registrant’s address may be required 
before the registrant is permitted to vote in a Federal 
election during the period beginning on the date of the 
notice and ending on the day after the date of the second 
Appendix A to opinion of BREYER, J. 
24 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
BREYER, J., dissenting 
general election for Federal office that occurs after the 
date of the notice, and if the registrant does not vote in an 
election during that period the registrant’s name will be 
removed from the list of eligible voters.“(B) If the registrant has changed residence to a place 
outside the registrar’s jurisdiction in which the registrant 
is registered, information concerning how the registrant 
can continue to be eligible to vote.“(3) A voting registrar shall correct an official list of 
eligible voters in elections for Federal office in accordance 
with change of residence information obtained in conform-
ance with this subsection.”  Id., at 82–84. 
Appendix A to opinion of BREYER, J.
 Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 25
BREYER, J., dissenting 
B 
The Help America Vote Act of 2002
“SEC. 303.  COMPUTERIZED STATEWIDE VOTER 
REGISTRATION LIST REQUIREMENTS AND REQUIRE- 
MENTS FOR VOTERS WHO REGISTER BY MAIL.“(a) COMPUTERIZED STATEWIDE VOTER REGISTRATION 
LIST REQUIREMENTS.— 
.      .      .      .      .“(4) MINIMUM STANDARD FOR ACCURACY OF STATE 
VOTER REGISTRATION RECORDS.—The State election sys-
tem shall include provisions to ensure that voter registra-
tion records in the State are accurate and are updated 
regularly, including the following:“(A) A system of file maintenance that makes a reason- 
able effort to remove registrants who are ineligible to vote 
from the official list of eligible voters. Under such system, 
consistent with the National Voter Registration Act of 
1993 (42 U.S.C. 1973gg et seq.), registrants who have not 
responded to a notice and who have not voted in 2 consec-
utive general elections for Federal office shall be removed 
from the official list of eligible voters, except that no regis-
trant may be removed solely by reason of a failure to vote.“(B) Safeguards to ensure that eligible voters are not 
removed in error from the official list of eligible voters.”  
116 Stat. 1708–1710.
Appendix B to opinion of BREYER, J. 
26 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
BREYER, J., dissenting 
“SEC. 903.  CLARIFICATION OF ABILITY OF ELECTION 
OFFICIALS TO REMOVE REGISTRANTS FROM OFFICIAL 
LIST OF VOTERS ON GROUNDS OF CHANGE OF 
RESIDENCE.“Section 8(b)(2) of the National Voter Registration Act of 
1993 . . . is amended by striking the period at the end and 
inserting the following: ‘‘, except that nothing in this 
paragraph may be construed to prohibit a State from 
using the procedures described in subsections (c) and (d) to 
remove an individual from the official list of eligible voters 
if the individual—‘‘(A) has not either notified the applicable registrar (in 
person or in writing) or responded during the period de-
scribed in subparagraph (B) to the notice sent by the 
applicable registrar; and then‘‘(B) has not voted or appeared to vote in 2 or more 
consecutive general elections for Federal office.’’  Id., at 
1728.
“SEC. 906.  NO EFFECT ON OTHER LAWS.“(a) IN GENERAL.— . . . [N]othing in this Act may be 
construed to authorize or require conduct prohibited under 
any of the following laws, or to supersede, restrict, or limit 
the application of such laws [including]: 
.      .      .      .      .“(4) The National Voter Registration Act of 1993.”  Id., 
at 1729. 
Appendix B to opinion of BREYER, J.
 Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 1
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
_________________ 
No. 16–980 
_________________ 
JON HUSTED, OHIO SECRETARY OF STATE, 
PETITIONER v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH 
INSTITUTE, ET AL. 
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF 
APPEALS FOR THE SIXTH CIRCUIT 
[June 11, 2018]JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR, dissenting.I join the principal dissent in full because I agree that 
the statutory text plainly supports respondents’ interpre-
tation.  I write separately to emphasize how that reading 
is bolstered by the essential purposes stated explicitly in 
the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (NVRA) to 
increase the registration and enhance the participation  
of eligible voters in federal elections.  52 U. S. C. 
§§20501(b)(1)–(2).  Congress enacted the NVRA against 
the backdrop of substantial efforts by States to disenfran-
chise low-income and minority voters, including programs 
that purged eligible voters from registration lists because 
they failed to vote in prior elections.  The Court errs in 
ignoring this history and distorting the statutory text to 
arrive at a conclusion that not only is contrary to the plain 
language of the NVRA but also contradicts the essential 
purposes of the statute, ultimately sanctioning the very 
purging that Congress expressly sought to protect against.Concerted state efforts to prevent minorities from voting 
and to undermine the efficacy of their votes are an unfor-
tunate feature of our country’s history.  See Schuette v. 
BAMN, 572 U. S. 291, 337–338 (2014) (SOTOMAYOR, J., 
dissenting).  As the principal dissent explains, “[i]n the 
late 19th and early 20th centuries, a number of 
2 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting 
‘[r]estrictive registration laws and administrative proce-
dures’ came to use across the United States.”  Ante, at 1–2 
(opinion of BREYER, J.).  States enforced “poll tax[es], 
literacy tests, residency requirements, selective purges, 
. . . and annual registration requirements,” which were 
developed “to keep certain groups of citizens from voting.”  
H. R. Rep. No. 103–9, p. 2 (1993).  Particularly relevant 
here, some States erected procedures requiring voters to 
renew registrations “whenever [they] moved or failed to 
vote in an election,” which “sharply depressed turnout, 
particularly among blacks and immigrants.”  A. Keyssar, 
The Right To Vote 124 (2009).  Even after the passage of 
the Voting Rights Act in 1965, many obstacles remained.  
See ante, at 2 (opinion of BREYER, J.).Congress was well aware of the “long history of such list 
cleaning mechanisms which have been used to violate the 
basic rights of citizens” when it enacted the NVRA.  
S. Rep. No. 103–6, p. 18 (1993).  Congress thus made clear 
in the statutory findings that “the right of citizens of the 
United States to vote is a fundamental right,” that “it is 
the duty of the Federal, State, and local governments to 
promote the exercise of that right,” and that “discrimina-
tory and unfair registration laws and procedures can have 
a direct and damaging effect on voter participation . . . and 
disproportionately harm voter participation by various 
groups, including racial minorities.”  52 U. S. C. §20501(a).  
In light of those findings, Congress enacted the NVRA 
with the express purposes of “increas[ing] the number of 
eligible citizens who register to vote” and “enhanc[ing] the 
participation of eligible citizens as voters.”  §§20501(b)(1)–
(2).  These stated purposes serve at least in part to coun-
teract the history of voter suppression, as evidenced by 
§20507(b)(2), which forbids “the removal of the name of 
any person from the official list of voters registered to vote 
in an election for Federal office by reason of the person’s 
failure to vote.”  Ibid.Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 3
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissentingOf course, Congress also expressed other objectives, “to 
protect the integrity of the electoral process” and “to en-
sure that accurate and current voter registration rolls are 
maintained.”  §§20501(b)(3)–(4).*  The statute contem-
plates, however, that States can, and indeed must, further 
all four stated objectives.  As relevant here, Congress 
crafted the NVRA with the understanding that, while 
States are required to make a “reasonable effort” to re-
move ineligible voters from the registration lists, 
§20507(a)(4), such removal programs must be developed in 
a manner that “prevent[s] poor and illiterate voters from 
being caught in a purge system which will require them to 
needlessly re-register” and “prevent[s] abuse which has a 
disparate impact on minority communities,” S. Rep. No. 
103–6, at 18.Ohio’s Supplemental Process reflects precisely the type 
of purge system that the NVRA was designed to prevent.  
Under the Supplemental Process, Ohio will purge a regis-
trant from the rolls after six years of not voting, e.g., sit-
ting out one Presidential election and two midterm elec-
tions, and after failing to send back one piece of mail, even 
though there is no reasonable basis to believe the individ-
ual actually moved.  See ante, at 14 (BREYER, J., dissent-
ing).  This purge program burdens the rights of eligible 
voters.  At best, purged voters are forced to “needlessly 
reregister” if they decide to vote in a subsequent election; 
at worst, they are prevented from voting at all because 
they never receive information about when and where 
—————— 
* The majority characterizes these objectives as ones to “remov[e] 
ineligible persons from the States’ voter registration rolls,” ante, at 2, 
but maintaining “accurate” rolls and “protecting the integrity of the 
electoral process” surely encompass more than just removing ineligible 
voters.  An accurate voter roll and fair electoral process should also 
reflect the continued enrollment of eligible voters.  In this way, the 
NVRA’s enhanced-participation and accuracy-maintenance goals are to 
be achieved simultaneously, and are mutually reinforcing. 
4 HUSTED v. A. PHILIP RANDOLPH INSTITUTE 
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting 
elections are taking place.It is unsurprising in light of the history of such purge 
programs that numerous amici report that the Supple-
mental Process has disproportionately affected minority, 
low-income, disabled, and veteran voters.  As one example, 
amici point to an investigation that revealed that in Ham-
ilton County, “African-American-majority neighborhoods 
in downtown Cincinnati had 10% of their voters removed 
due to inactivity” since 2012, as “compared to only 4% of 
voters in a suburban, majority-white neighborhood.”  Brief 
for National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People et al. as Amici Curiae 18–19.  Amici also explain at 
length how low voter turnout rates, language-access prob-
lems, mail delivery issues, inflexible work schedules, and 
transportation issues, among other obstacles, make it 
more difficult for many minority, low-income, disabled, 
homeless, and veteran voters to cast a ballot or return a 
notice, rendering them particularly vulnerable to unwar-
ranted removal under the Supplemental Process.  See 
Brief for Asian Americans Advancing Justice | AAJC et 
al. as Amici Curiae 15–26; Brief for National Disability 
Rights Network et al. as Amici Curiae 17, 21–24, 29–31; 
Brief for VoteVets Action Fund as Amicus Curiae 23–30.  
See also Brief for Libertarian National Committee as 
Amicus Curiae 19–22 (burdens on principled nonvoters).Neither the majority nor Ohio meaningfully dispute that 
the Supplemental Process disproportionately burdens 
these communities.  At oral argument, Ohio suggested 
that such a disparate impact is not pertinent to this case 
because respondents did not challenge the Supplemental 
Process under §20507(b)(1), which requires that any re-
moval program “be uniform, nondiscriminatory, and in 
compliance with the Voting Rights Act.”  Tr. of Oral Arg. 
23.  The fact that respondents did not raise a claim under 
§20507(b)(1), however, is wholly irrelevant to our assess-
ment of whether, as a matter of statutory interpretation,Cite as: 584 U. S. ____ (2018) 5
SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting 
the Supplemental Process removes voters “by reason of the 
person’s failure to vote” in violation of §20507(b)(2).  Con-
trary to the majority’s view, ante, at 20–21, the NVRA’s 
express findings and purpose are highly relevant to that 
interpretive analysis because they represent “the assumed 
facts and the purposes that the majority of the enacting 
legislature . . . had in mind, and these can shed light on 
the meaning of the operative provisions that follow.”  A. 
Scalia & B. Garner, Reading Law 218 (2012).  Respond-
ents need not demonstrate discriminatory intent to estab-
lish that Ohio’s interpretation of the NVRA is contrary to 
the statutory text and purpose.In concluding that the Supplemental Process does not 
violate the NVRA, the majority does more than just mis-
construe the statutory text.  It entirely ignores the history 
of voter suppression against which the NVRA was enacted 
and upholds a program that appears to further the very 
disenfranchisement of minority and low-income voters 
that Congress set out to eradicate.  States, though, need 
not choose to be so unwise.  Our democracy rests on the 
ability of all individuals, regardless of race, income, or 
status, to exercise their right to vote.  The majority of 
States have found ways to maintain accurate voter rolls 
without initiating removal processes based solely on an 
individual’s failure to vote.  See App. to Brief for League of 
Women Voters of the United States et al. as Amici Curiae 
1a–9a; Brief for State of New York et al. as Amici Curiae 
22–28.  Communities that are disproportionately affected 
by unnecessarily harsh registration laws should not toler-
ate efforts to marginalize their influence in the political 
process, nor should allies who recognize blatant unfairness 
stand idly by.  Today’s decision forces these communities 
and their allies to be even more proactive and vigilant in 
holding their States accountable and working to dismantle 
the obstacles they face in exercising the fundamental right 
to vote.
              