
SUMMARY:
id:4
date:12/20/17
docket:17-801
name:In Re United States
summary: The Ninth Circuit’s judgment upholding a District Court order requiring the Government to complete the administrative record filed in a proceeding brought to enjoin recession of the Deferred Action in Childhood Arrivals program is vacated.
revised: 
J.:PC
Pt.:583/1
url:https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/17pdf/17-801_6jgm.pdf

VERDICT:
Cite as: 583 U. S. ____ (2017) 1
Per Curiam 
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES 
IN RE UNITED STATES, ET AL. 
ON PETITION FOR WRIT OF MANDAMUS 
No. 17–801. Decided December 20, 2017
 PER CURIAM.This case arises from five related lawsuits that chal-
lenge a determination adopted by the Acting Secretary of 
the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).  The deter-
mination, announced by the Acting Secretary, is to take 
immediate steps to rescind a program known as Deferred 
Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA, by March 5, 2018.  
The Acting Secretary stated that her determination was 
based in part on the Attorney General’s conclusion that 
DACA is unlawful and likely would be enjoined in poten-
tially imminent litigation.The five suits were filed in the United States District 
Court for the Northern District of California, and the 
plaintiffs in those actions are the respondents in the mat-
ter now before this Court.  The defendants in the District 
Court, and the petitioners here, include the Govern- 
ment of the United States, the Acting Secretary, and the 
President of the United States, all referred to here as the 
Government.In the District Court litigation respondents argue that 
the Acting Secretary’s determination to rescind DACA in 
the near future is unlawful because, among other reasons, 
it violates the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) and 
the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment, including 
the equal protection guarantee implicit in that Clause.The issue to be considered here involves respondents’ 
contention that the administrative record the Government 
filed to support the Acting Secretary’s determination to 
rescind DACA is incomplete.  The record consists of 256 
2 IN RE UNITED STATES 
Per Curiam 
pages of documents, and the Government contends that it 
contains all of the nondeliberative material considered by 
the Acting Secretary in reaching her determination.  
(Nearly 200 pages consist of published opinions from 
various federal courts.)On October 17, the District Court, on respondents’ 
motion, ordered the Government to complete the adminis-
trative record.  See Regents of Univ. of Cal. v. Department 
of Homeland Security, App. C to Pet. for Mandamus, 2017 
WL 4642324 (ND Cal., Oct. 17, 2017) (District Court Or-
der).  The details of that order are recounted further be-
low.  See infra, at 3.The Government petitioned for a writ of mandamus in 
the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.  The Court of 
Appeals, in a divided opinion, denied the Government’s 
petition.  See 875 F. 3d 1200 (2017).On November 19, three days after the Court of Appeals 
issued its opinion, respondents moved the District Court 
to stay its order requiring completion of the administra-
tive record until after the District Court resolved the 
Government’s motion to dismiss and respondents’ motion 
for a preliminary injunction.  See Motion to Stay in No. 
17–cv–5211 (Nov. 19, 2017), Doc. 190.  The District Court 
did not grant respondents’ request, instead staying its 
order for one month.Still objecting to the District Court’s order, the Govern-
ment now seeks relief in this Court.  It has filed here a 
petition for a writ of mandamus to the District Court, or, 
in the alternative, for a writ of certiorari to the Court of 
Appeals.The Court now grants the petition for a writ of certiorari, 
vacates the order of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth 
Circuit, and remands the case.The District Court’s October 17 order requires the Gov-
ernment to turn over all “emails, letters, memoranda, 
notes, media items, opinions and other materials” that fallCite as: 583 U. S. ____ (2017) 3
Per Curiam 
within the following categories: 
“(1) all materials actually seen or considered, however 
briefly, by Acting Secretary [Elaine] Duke in connec-
tion with the potential or actual decision to rescind 
DACA . . . , (2) all DACA-related materials considered 
by persons (anywhere in the government) who there-
after provided Acting Secretary Duke with written 
advice or input regarding the actual or potential re-
scission of DACA, (3) all DACA-related materials con-
sidered by persons (anywhere in the government) who 
thereafter provided Acting Secretary Duke with ver-
bal input regarding the actual or potential rescission 
of DACA, (4) all comments and questions propounded 
by Acting Secretary Duke to advisors or subordinates 
or others regarding the actual or potential rescission 
of DACA and their responses, and (5) all materials di-
rectly or indirectly considered by former Secretary of 
DHS John Kelly leading to his February 2017 memo-
randum not to rescind DACA.”  District Court Order, 
2017 WL 4642324, at *8.The Government makes serious arguments that at least 
portions of the District Court’s order are overly broad.  
(The Government appears to emphasize certain materials 
in categories 2, 3, and 4.)  Under the specific facts of this 
case, the District Court should have granted respondents’ 
motion on November 19 to stay implementation of the 
challenged October 17 order and first resolved the Gov-
ernment’s threshold arguments (that the Acting Secre-
tary’s determination to rescind DACA is unreviewable 
because it is “committed to agency discretion,” 5 U. S. C. 
§701(a)(2), and that the Immigration and Nationality Act 
deprives the District Court of jurisdiction).  Either of those 
arguments, if accepted, likely would eliminate the need for 
the District Court to examine a complete administrative 
record.  
4 IN RE UNITED STATES 
Per CuriamOn remand of the case, the Court of Appeals shall take 
appropriate action so that the following steps can be 
taken.  The District Court should proceed to rule on the 
Government’s threshold arguments and, in doing so, may 
consider certifying that ruling for interlocutory appeal 
under 28 U. S. C. §1292(b) if appropriate.   Thereafter, the 
Court of Appeals or the District Court in the first instance 
may consider whether narrower amendments to the record 
are necessary and appropriate.  In any event, the District 
Court may not compel the Government to disclose any 
document that the Government believes is privileged 
without first providing the Government with the oppor-
tunity to argue the issue.This order does not suggest any view on the merits of 
respondents’ claims or the Government’s defenses, or that 
the District Court’s rulings on the Government’s motion to 
dismiss and respondents’ motion for preliminary injunc-
tion should be delayed.The judgment of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth 
Circuit is vacated, and the case is remanded for further 
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.
              